                                  RESOLUTION AGREEMENT
                                   Minneapolis Public Schools
                                    OCR Case No. 05-22-1171

   Minneapolis Public Schools (District) enters into this voluntary Resolution Agreement
   (Agreement) with the U.S. Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights (OCR), to resolve
   OCR Case No. 05-22-1171. The District assures OCR that it will take the following actions to
   resolve the compliance concerns identified by OCR and comply with the requirements of Title
   IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX), at 20 U.S.C. §§ 1681-1688, and Title IX’s
   implementing regulation, 34 C.F.R. Part 106, which prohibit discrimination based upon sex in
   any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance. This Agreement does
   not constitute an admission by the District of a violation of Title IX of the Education
   Amendments of 1972 (Title IX), or any other law enforced by OCR.

 I.   NOTICE REQUIREMENT

      Within 30 calendar days of executing this Agreement, the District will provide to the
      Principals and Athletic Directors at each District high school written instructions describing
      the District’s obligations under the terms of this Agreement.

          REPORTING REQUIREMENT I:

          1. Within 30 calendar days of executing this Agreement, the District will provide
             OCR with documentation demonstrating that it has provided the notice required in
             Item I, including copies of any written instructions, email correspondence, or other
             documentation provided to the high school Principals and Athletic Directors.

II.   DISTRICT-WIDE TITLE IX ATHLETICS POLICIES

      Within 60 days of signing this Agreement, the District will review, revise, and develop
      District-wide policies and procedures to ensure the District complies with the requirements of
      Title IX in its interscholastic athletics program in each of the program components applicable
      to its high schools (including interests and abilities, equipment and supplies, scheduling of
      games and practice times, travel and per diem expenses, opportunity to receive and
      assignment of coaching and academic tutoring, locker rooms, practice and competitive
      facilities, medical and training services and facilities, publicity). At a minimum, the District
      will take the following steps:
              a. The District will review any current District policies and procedures, and will
                  develop policies and procedures to ensure compliance with Title IX in the
                  District’s provision of interscholastic athletics, with appropriate oversite.
              b. The District will review its funding allocation procedures for athletics, and develop
                  policies and procedures specifically addressing that funding from any sources (e.g.,
                  booster clubs) will not create disparities.
              c. The District will provide a forum to receive input and recommendations from the
                  Stakeholder Committee (described below) and will consult, as needed, one or more
                  consultants with Title IX expertise specifically as it relates to athletics.
   Page 2 of 11


             d. The District will ensure that the established policies and procedures provide a
                formal mechanism for the District to receive input from stakeholders, including but
                not limited to, student athletes and their parents.
             e. The District will further ensure that the District publicizes on its website grievance
                procedures for complaints that the District is not complying with Title IX in its
                provision of interscholastic athletics.

          REPORTING REQUIREMENTS II:

          1. By October 14, 2024, the District will provide to OCR for review and approval its
             proposed policies and procedures to ensure the District complies with the
             requirements of Title IX in its interscholastic athletics program.

          2. Following OCR’s approval of the written policies and procedures, the District
             will submit the approved policies and procedures to the District’s Superintendent
             and/or School Board for approval, if necessary. Policies and procedures submitted to
             the School Board for approval shall be placed on the next available agenda for a
             regularly scheduled School Board meeting. Within 10 calendar days after any
             required approval of the written policies and/or procedures, the District will issue the
             new policies and/or procedures to the Athletic Directors of each high school, the
             Principals of each high school, and all coaches of interscholastic athletics teams at
             each high school, and any other individuals responsible for implementing the
             District’s athletics programming.

III.   STAKEHOLDER COMMITTEE

       The District will establish a Stakeholder Committee to provide input and recommendations to
       the District as it creates its District-wide policies and procedures to ensure compliance with
       the requirements of Title IX in the District’s interscholastic athletics program. Such
       stakeholders shall include, at a minimum, student athletes, student athlete parents, former
       student athletes, interested community members, and will have at least one representative
       that is an Athletic Director or coach.

       The District will provide the Stakeholder Committee a forum to provide feedback and
       recommendations on the District’s Title IX athletics policies and procedures, grievance
       procedures, and other Title IX athletics compliance issues prior to finalizing the
       recommended policies and procedures for submission to OCR. The District will provide a
       written response addressing each of the Stakeholder Committee’s recommendations, with a
       basis for rejecting any recommendation by the Stakeholder Committee the District does not
       accept.

          REPORTING REQUIREMENTS III:

          1. By September 16, 2024, the District will establish the Stakeholder Committee, and
             will provide OCR with a list of the members of the Stakeholder Committee, including
             the member’s title and contact information.
  Page 3 of 11


         2. By October 14, 2024, the District will provide OCR with copies of the Stakeholder
            Committee’s written recommendations and identify the steps the District took in
            response to the Stakeholder Committee’s written recommendations, including a copy
            of the District’s written response regarding the Stakeholder Committee’s
            recommendations.

IV.   DISTRICT TITLE IX ATHLETICS COMPLIANCE COORDINATOR

      By August 6, 2024, the District will appoint a designated Title IX Athletics Compliance
      Coordinator (Coordinator) to ensure the District’s compliance with Title IX and the
      provisions of this Agreement and provide oversite with respect to each high school’s
      compliance with Title IX in its athletics program.

      The Coordinator’s responsibilities will include, at a minimum, ensuring each high school
      Athletic Director is informed of and trained on their responsibilities under Title IX as it
      pertains to the District’s interscholastic athletics at each school, ensuring the District-level
      athletics program complies with Title IX, ensuring that each school maintains compliance
      with Title IX in its athletics programming, reviewing the results of school-based and District-
      wide assessments, ensuring the Stakeholder Committee is provided a forum to provide
      recommendations and feedback and reviewing / responding to the Stakeholder Committee’s
      feedback, and serving as a liaison between the District and the community to address
      concerns and / or barriers for students of the underrepresented sex in accessing the District’s
      interscholastic athletics program. The Coordinator additionally will be responsible for
      ensuring timely and accurate reporting pursuant to this Agreement.

         REPORTING REQUIREMENT IV:

         1. By August 15, 2024, the District will provide OCR with the name and contact
            information of the Coordinator and identify the Coordinator’s qualifications.

V.    INTEREST AND ABILITIES

      By no later than the 2026-2027 school year, the District will provide opportunities in its
      interscholastic athletics program for female and male students that equally and effectively
      accommodate the athletic interests and abilities of members of both sexes at each of its high
      schools with interscholastic athletics programs.

         Demonstration of Compliance

         The District has the option to demonstrate compliance at each high school with any one
         part of the three-part test used by OCR to assess whether the interests and abilities of
         members of both sexes are being effectively accommodated to the extent necessary to
         provide an equal opportunity to participate in interscholastic athletics by documenting
         that:

         1. The District is providing interscholastic athletic participation opportunities for female
            and male students in numbers substantially proportionate to their respective
            enrollments at each high school (Part I); or
Page 4 of 11


       2. The District had a history and continuing practice of interscholastic athletics program
          expansion at each high school that is demonstrably responsive to the developing
          interests and abilities of students who are members of the underrepresented sex (Part
          2); or
       3. The interests and abilities of students who are members of the underrepresented sex at
          each high school have been fully and effectively accommodated by the District’s
          current interscholastic athletics program (Part 3).

       Each part of the three-part test is an equally sufficient and separate method of complying
       with the Title IX regulatory requirements to provide nondiscriminatory athletic
       participation opportunities. Additional guidance to institutions on the requirements for
       compliance with Title IX in athletics programs is provided in the December 11, 1979,
       Intercollegiate Athletics Policy Interpretation, at 44 Fed Reg. 413 et seq.

          A. Title IX Athletics Assessment and Plan

               The District will conduct a full assessment of how it can equally and effectively
               accommodate the athletic interest and abilities to the extent necessary to provide
               equal opportunities for female students in its high school interscholastic athletics
               program using Part 1 or Part 3 of the three-part test at each high school as set
               forth below. To the extent that the District is not in compliance with Title IX at
               any high school, the District will create a plan, with timeframes, to increase
               participation opportunities for female students as necessary to demonstrate
               compliance with Title IX by the end of the 2026-2027 school year, and will take
               substantial steps towards equally and effectively accommodating the athletic
               interest and abilities of females during the 2024-2025 and 2025-2026 school
               years. The District plan shall include a process or procedure for students or other
               interested parties, such as coaches or parents, to use in requesting the addition of
               new sports or levels of sports at the District high school; annual assessments of
               any barriers to participation for students or other interested parties in the District’s
               interscholastic athletics program or other items unique to the specific
               circumstances of the high school.

          B. Options to Increase Participation Opportunities pursuant to Title IX

               For any District high school determined not to be in compliance with Part 1 of the
               three-part test identified above, by October 31, 2024, the District will provide to
               OCR for review and approval a plan for an objective assessment to determine the
               athletic interests and abilities of female students and whether the District is fully
               and effectively accommodating the athletic interests and abilities of female
               students under Part 3 of the three-part test. The plan for the assessment will be
               based on multiple indicators of interest and multiple indicators of ability, which
               may include:

                   i. Results of surveys of students or other information collected from students
                      using a method that is designed to fully and accurately assess unmet
                      athletic interests and abilities in sports among female students;
Page 5 of 11


                 ii. Identification of sports, squads, and levels of sports for female students
                     that are not currently offered at a District high school but are offered
                     either by schools that compete within the league(s) in which the District
                     competes or by schools that are within the District’s normal competitive
                     region and geographic area.

                iii. Review of any requests (whether oral or written, formal or informal) made
                     to administrators, coaches, or staff by or on behalf of female students to
                     add a particular sport, squad, or level of sport, or to elevate an existing
                     club or intramural sport after the District has published procedures for
                     making such requests.

                iv. Identification of sports, squads, and levels of sports for female students
                    that are not currently offered at a District high school but are offered
                    either by schools that compete within the league(s) in which the District
                    competes or by schools that are within the District’s normal competitive
                    region and geographic area.

                 v. Any club sports in place at the high school, the names of the club sports
                    and the number of female students who participated in the club sports;

                vi. Popular sports offered during physical education courses at the high
                    school and in community sports leagues, clubs or other youth programs
                    offered in the high school’s geographic area;

               vii. Whether significant numbers of female students were cut from a high
                    school team;

               viii. Whether interested students at these District high schools have the ability
                     to sustain a Minnesota State High School League (MSHSL) sanctioned
                     sports team, either at the high school or through a school-based or
                     cooperative team, noting that they do not need the ability to sustain a
                     successful or elite team, but only need to show that they have the potential
                     to participate in team try-outs, practices and competitions and, with
                     coaching, the potential to attain sufficient ability to participate at the
                     particular level of competition (varsity, junior varsity, etc.) in which they
                     have expressed interest.

                ix. Whether students at these District high schools have interest in a sport or
                    team not sanctioned by the MSHSL, and whether the school has the ability
                    to sustain interscholastic competition with other schools in the sport in the
                    school’s normal competitive region and geographic area.

                 x. Any other information that demonstrates the athletic interests and abilities
                    of the students who are members of the underrepresented sex.
Page 6 of 11


          C. Additional Commitments to Create Athletic Opportunities for the
             Underrepresented Sex

               For any District high school determined not to be in compliance with Part 1 or
               Part 3 of the three-part test identified above and determined to have unmet interest
               in athletic participation, in addition to the steps the District plan identifies to
               increase athletic participation in their plan under Item V(A), the District will take
               the following actions:

                    i. The District will annually conduct an assessment of any barriers to
                       participation for students or other interested parties in the District’s
                       interscholastic athletics program.
                   ii. The District will provide written notice on its website at each high school
                       identifying all sports offered at each District high school.
                  iii. The District will ensure that each District high school regularly updates its
                       website with a description of the sports offerings at each high school,
                       including at a minimum, the interscholastic and club sports available to
                       male and female students at each high school, the season in which the
                       sport competes, and the name and contact information for the Athletic
                       Directors for each high school.

       REPORTING REQUIREMENT V:

       1. By October 31, 2024, the District will submit to OCR for review and approval, its
          assessment under Part 1 of the three-part test for each high school. For each high
          school the District determines to have met Part 1 of the three-part test, the District
          will provide OCR with total number of students enrolled, the number of male and
          female students, a list of all teams and levels for each interscholastic athletics team,
          participation numbers for each team, and a copy of each team’s squad/eligibility list.
          For each high school that does not comply with Part 1, the District will provide a plan
          (with designated timeframes) consistent with the requirements of Item V(B) to
          conduct an assessment of the students under Part 3 of the three-part test to determine
          if the high school equally and effectively accommodates the athletic interests and
          abilities to the extent necessary to provide equal opportunities for female students in
          its interscholastic athletics program at each high school. The plan will include, at a
          minimum, the following information:
               a. For any proposed survey:
                      i. A complete description of the methodology that will be used to
                         conduct the survey, including how the survey will be distributed, the
                         number of surveys that will be distributed, the grade levels of students
                         who will receive the surveys, any planned follow-up to the initial
                         distribution of the survey, the names and contact information for the
                         individual(s) who will analyze the responses to the surveys, and the
                         protocol for retaining a copy of any notes or other documents
                         compiled during the review of the surveys;
Page 7 of 11


                        ii. A description of the methodology to ensure that the survey is designed
                            to fully and accurately assess unmet athletic interests and, if
                            applicable, abilities in interscholastic sports among female students;
               b.   For any other type of assessment:
                         i. A complete description of the methodology that will be used to
                            conduct the assessment, including the number and demographics of the
                            students that will be assessed, a description of how the responses to the
                            assessment will be analyzed, the names and contact information for the
                            individual(s) who will analyze the responses to the assessment, and the
                            protocol for retaining a copy of any notes or other documents
                            compiled during the review of the assessment;
                        ii. A description of the methodology to ensure that the assessment is
                            designed to fully and accurately assess unmet athletic interests and, if
                            applicable, abilities in interscholastic sports among female students;
               c.   A summary of sports, squads, and levels of sports for female students that are
                    not currently offered at a District high school but are offered either by schools
                    that compete within the MSHSL, or in schools that are within the District's
                    normal competitive region and geographic area;
               d.   Rates of participation by male and female students in interscholastic sports
                    and club sports for each school;
               e.   A summary of the number of female students who were cut from each high
                    school team and level, and the reasons they were cut;
               f.   A copy of any written requests and a summary of any non-written requests
                    made by or on behalf of female students to add a particular sport, squad, or
                    level of sport, or to elevate an existing club or intramural sport to
                    interscholastic sport status;
               g.   If available, a description of any teams that were eliminated at any of these
                    District high schools during the prior five school years, regardless of gender,
                    including the number of participants who were on the team in the year it was
                    eliminated and the reason for the team’s elimination, if known;
               h.   A description of any other information that will be considered by the District
                    as part of its assessment in determining whether it is fully and effectively
                    accommodating the athletic interests and abilities of female students in
                    District high schools.

       2. By January 10, 2025, for any District high school determined not to be in
          compliance with Part 1 of the three-part test, the District will provide OCR for is
          review and approval a detailed description of the results of the high school’s
          assessment used to determine the athletic interests and abilities of female students and
          whether the District is fully and effectively accommodating the athletic interests and
          abilities of female students conducted pursuant to this Agreement. For any high
          school the assessment shows not to be in compliance with Part 3 of the three-part test,
          the District will provide to OCR for a review and approval a plan, with timeframes, to
          increase participation opportunities for female students as necessary to demonstrate
          compliance with Title IX by the end of the 2026-2027 school year, including the
          process or procedure for students or other interested parties, such as coaches or
          parents, to request the addition of new sports or levels of sports at the District high
  Page 8 of 11


             school; annual assessments of any barriers to participation for students or other
             interested parties in the District’s interscholastic athletics program or other items
             unique to the specific circumstances of the high school. The plan will document the
             steps the District has taken and will take to increase athletic participation during the
             2024-2025 and 2025-2026 school years.

         3. By June 30, 2025, and by that same date annually thereafter, while this Agreement is
            in effect, the District will provide OCR with a detailed report evaluating whether its
            interscholastic athletics program equally and effectively accommodates the athletic
            interests and abilities to the extent necessary to provide equal opportunities for female
            students at each high school. The report will include a detailed description of the
            steps the District has taken to date, including the dates the actions were taken, in
            accordance with the plan identified in Item V(A) of this Agreement and consistent
            with the commitments in Item V(C). The District will provide supporting
            documentation showing the enrollment rates and team squad lists for each team at
            each high school to demonstrate compliance with Part 1 of the three-part test, and for
            each high school that does not demonstrate compliance with Part 1, the District will
            provide documentation demonstrating the interests and abilities of female students
            have been fully and effectively accommodated at each high school to demonstrate
            compliance with Part 3 of the three-part test.

VI.   LOCKER ROOM, PRACTICE AND COMPETITIVE FACILITIES

      The District will provide equal athletic opportunity for both sexes in the District’s
      interscholastic athletics program in the provision of locker rooms, practice and competitive
      facilities at each high school by the end of the 2026-2027 school year, and will take
      substantial steps towards providing equal athletic opportunity for both sexes in the District’s
      interscholastic athletics program in the provision of locker rooms, practice and competitive
      facilities during the 2024-2025 and 2025-2026 school years. At a minimum, the District will
      ensure the following:
                     1. By no later than the first day of the 2024-2025 school year, each high
                        school provides equivalent access for both sexes to utilize the facility’s
                        weightroom;
                     2. By no later than the first day of the 2024-2025 school year, each high
                        school provides equivalent access and availability of its locker room for
                        both sexes;
                     3. By no later than the first day of the 2024-2025 school year, each high
                        school provides equivalent preparation and maintenance of its facilities for
                        practices and competitive events for both sexes, specifically addressing
                        any disparities that exist as it relates to maintenance of practice and
                        competitive facilities and preparation for girls volleyball, girls badminton,
                        and girls softball;
                     4. By no later than the first day of the 2024-2025 softball competitive season,
                        the girls softball teams are provided with equivalent availability and
                        access to their practice and competitive facilities;
   Page 9 of 11


                      5. By no later than the first day of the 2024-2025 softball competitive season,
                         the girls softball teams are provided with equivalent opportunity to
                         complete their competitive games at the competitive facilities;
                      6. By no later than the 2026-2027 school year, each high school provides
                         equivalent number and quality of locker rooms, practice and competitive
                         facilities to both male and female interscholastic participants;
                      7. By no later than the 2026-2027 school year, the practice and competitive
                         softball fields are equivalent in quality and amenities to facilities used by
                         other teams, specifically addressing the lack of opportunity for girls
                         softball team to practice and compete in facilities that are regulation for
                         the sport.

          REPORTING REQUIREMENTS VI:

          1. By January 10, 2025, the District will provide for OCR review and approval a plan
             (including a timeline and description) to provide both sexes in the District’s
             interscholastic athletics program, equal opportunities in the provision of locker
             rooms, practice and competitive facilities by the end of the 2026-2027 school year.
             The plan must include a detailed description of the substantial steps the District has
             taken and will take towards providing equal athletic opportunity for both sexes in the
             District’s interscholastic athletics program in the provision of locker rooms, practice
             and competitive facilities during the 2024-2025 and 2025-2026 school years.

          2. By June 30, 2025, and by that same date annually thereafter, while this Agreement is
             in effect, the District will provide OCR with a report, documenting the actions taken
             to provide equal opportunities to members of both sexes in the District’s
             interscholastic athletics program as required Item VI (1)-(7) The report will include
             photographs of the practice and competitive facilities used by both sexes for softball
             and baseball. Annual reports thereafter shall include photographs of changes, if any,
             to the practice and competitive facilities used by both sexes for softball and baseball.

VII.   TITLE IX TRAINING

       By September 28, 2024, the District will provide its Title IX Coordinator, the District
       Athletic Director, all District Athletic personnel, all high school Athletic Directors and
       Principals, and all coaches of interscholastic and club teams at the District with a training on
       the District’s responsibilities under Title IX and its application to athletics, including its
       obligation to provide equal athletic opportunity for both sexes in all program components and
       how funding from any source (e.g., booster clubs) can affect the balance of equivalent
       benefits and services for male and female athletes. The training will be conducted by an
       individual(s) knowledgeable about Title IX Athletics. Within 15 calendar days following the
       completion of the Title IX training, the District will conduct a post-training survey of all
    Page 10 of 11


        District staff who participated in the training to gauge their comprehension and retention of
        the material.

           REPORTING REQUIREMENTS VII:

           1. By August 16, 2024, the District will provide OCR with the name(s) and
              qualifications of the proposed trainer(s), and a draft of the proposed materials to
              accompany the Title IX training for OCR review and approval.

           2. Within 30 calendar days following completion of the Title IX training, the
              District will provide OCR with a sign-in sheet or other evidence of attendance by
              name and title, a list of any required District or School administrators or staff who did
              not attend and a timeline for their completion of the training, copies of the post-
              training survey response, and a plan (with timelines) to address any deficiencies
              identified in the post-training survey.

VIII.   TRAINING ON THE DISTRICT’S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

        By no later than January 10, 2025, the District will provide its Title IX Coordinator, the
        District Athletic Director, all District Athletic personnel, all high school Athletic Directors
        and Principals, and all in-season coaches of interscholastic and club teams at the District with
        a training on the District’s newly written District-wide Athletic policies and procedure. For
        coaches who are not in-season at that time, the District will conduct additional trainings prior
        to the first day of their season. A copy of the procedures will be provided to all coaches.
        Within 15 calendar days following the completion of the Title IX training, the District will
        conduct a post-training survey of all District staff who participated in the training to gauge
        their comprehension and retention of the material.

           REPORTING REQUIREMENT VIII:

           1. By January 30, 2025, the District will provide OCR with a sign-in sheet or other
              evidence of attendance by name and title, a list of any required District or School
              administrators or staff who did not attend and a timeline for their completion of the
              training, copies of the post-training survey response, and a plan (with timelines) to
              address any deficiencies identified in the post-training survey.

           2. Within 30 days after each additional training provided, the District will provide
              OCR with a sign-in sheet or other evidence of attendance by name and title, copies of
              the post-training survey response, and a plan (with timelines) to address any
              deficiencies identified in the post-training survey.

 IX.    DATA RETENTION REQUIREMENT

        By no later than the end of the 2024-2025 school year, the District will establish a process
        for compiling and maintaining an accurate record of the interscholastic sports offered at each
        District high school. The record will include a listing of the different levels (varsity, junior
        varsity, sophomore, and freshman) at which each sport is offered for boys and girls at each
        District high school and the number of students participating in each level of each sport at
Page 11 of 11


   each District high school, delineated by sex. The database will also include a listing of the
   various cooperative teams for District sports as well as a list of the cooperatives teams
   formed amongst the various District high schools. The process established by the District will
   include mechanisms for ensuring that the information contained in the record is current,
   complete, and accurate in a manner sufficient for OCR to determine the District’s compliance
   with this Agreement.

       REPORTING REQUIREMENT IX:

       1. By October 31, 2024, the District will provide OCR with documentation referenced
          in Item IX of the Agreement. The District will provide verification that a database has
          been created and provide supporting documentation, including a sample of the
          database.

GENERAL TERMS AND PRINCIPLES

By signing the Agreement, the District agrees to provide data and other information in a timely
manner in accordance with the reporting requirements of the Agreement. During the monitoring
of the Agreement, OCR may visit the District, interview staff and students, and request such
additional reports or data as are necessary for OCR to determine whether the District has fulfilled
the terms of the Agreement.

The District understands that OCR will not close the monitoring of the Agreement until such
time as OCR determines that the District is in compliance with the Agreement’s terms and the
statute(s) and regulation(s) implementing Title IX at 34 C.F.R. § 106.41(c)(1), which is at issue
in the case.

The District understands that OCR may initiate administrative enforcement proceedings or refer
the case to the Department of Justice (DOJ) for judicial proceedings to enforce the specific terms
of the Agreement and the applicable statute(s) and regulation(s). Before initiating such
proceedings, OCR will give the District written notice of the alleged breach and sixty (60)
calendar days to cure the alleged breach.

The Agreement will become effective immediately upon the signature of the District’s
representative below.

DATED this 6th day of August 2024.


_/s/________________________________________
Colin Beachy, Chair
Minneapolis Public Schools


_/s/________________________________________
Lori Norvell, Clerk
Minneapolis Public Schools
