                       UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                            REGION V
                                    OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS
                                                                                            ILLINOIS
                                 JOHN C. KLUCZYNSKI FEDERAL BUILDING                        INDIANA
                                   230 S. DEARBORN STREET, 37TH FLOOR                       IOWA
                                             CHICAGO, IL 60604                              MINNESOTA
                                                                                            NORTH DAKOTA
                                                                                            WISCONSIN

                                           August 7, 2024

Lisa Sayles-Adams
Superintendent
Minneapolis Public Schools-Special School District No. 1
Sent via email only to: MPSSup@mpls.k12.mn.us

RE:    OCR Case No. 05-22-1171
       Minneapolis Public Schools

Dear Superintendent Sayles-Adams:

This letter is to inform you of the disposition of the above-referenced complaint filed with the
U.S. Department of Education (Department), Office for Civil Rights (OCR), against the
Minneapolis Public Schools (District) alleging discrimination based on sex. OCR investigated
whether the District discriminates on the basis of sex against female students by failing to
provide equal athletic opportunity in its interscholastic athletics program in the following areas:

   1. Effective accommodation of the interests and abilities of female students in the District’s
      high school interscholastic athletics program;
   2. Provision of practice and competitive facilities, and locker rooms in the District’s high
      school interscholastic athletics program; and
   3. Provision of equipment and supplies for Edison High School (Edison).

OCR enforces Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX), 20 U.S.C. §§ 1681-
1688, and its implementing regulation at 34 C.F.R. Part 106, which prohibit discrimination on
the basis of sex in any education program or activity operated by a recipient of federal financial
assistance from the Department. As a recipient of federal financial assistance from the
Department, the District is subject to Title IX.

Summary of Concerns

OCR’s investigation raised concerns that the District does not effectively accommodate the
interests and abilities of female students in its interscholastic athletics program at several District
high schools and overall. OCR’s investigation also raised concerns that there is a disparity in the
quality, amenities, and equivalency of the practice and competition facilities that the District
provides, particularly regarding the girls softball teams. OCR similarly identified a disparity in
equivalent preparation related to practice and competition facilities that favors male athletes.
OCR identified further concerns regarding the District providing equal access to locker rooms.
Page 2 of 35

Methodology

During its investigation, OCR reviewed documents and other information provided by the
complainants, reviewed documentation provided by the District, administered and reviewed
responses from surveys of District coaches and District student athletes regarding the allegations
under investigation, and conducted an onsite visit to the District in May and June 2023. During
OCR’s onsite visit, OCR interviewed the District’s Athletic Director (District AD), the District’s
Assistant Director of Athletics, the District’s Athletic Department Project Manager (Project
Manager), and the Athletic Directors (ADs) at six high schools. OCR also conducted focus
groups with male and female District student athletes at the seven high schools offering
interscholastic athletics programs. Finally, OCR inspected the athletic facilities used by the
District, including its practice and competitive facilities, its locker rooms, and also inspected the
equipment and supplies at Edison.

Before OCR concluded its investigation, the District expressed interest in resolving the
complaint under Section 302 of OCR’s Case Processing Manual (CPM) and OCR identified
concerns that would be appropriate to resolve with a Resolution Agreement (Agreement).

Background

During the 2021-2022 school year, the District enrolled 8487 students in its high schools, with
4284 boys (50.5%), 4151 girls (48.9%), and 52 non-binary students. In 2022-2023, the total high
school student enrollment was 8155 students, with 4104 boys (50.3%), 3972 girls (48.7%), and
79 non-binary students.

The District’s high school athletes compete in the Minneapolis City Conference of the Minnesota
State High School League (MSHSL). The District AD stated to OCR that the District offers all
sports sanctioned by the MSHSL, with the exception of clay target shooting and synchronized
swimming, either at a District school or through a District-sponsored Cooperative team. The
District offers the following sports: alpine skiing (boys and girls), badminton (girls), baseball
(boys), basketball (boys and girls), cross country (boys and girls), football, golf (boys and girls),
gymnastics (girls), hockey (boys and girls), lacrosse (boys and girls), Nordic ski (boys and girls),
soccer (boys and girls), softball (girls), swimming and diving (boys and girls), tennis (boys and
girls), track and field (boys and girls), volleyball (girls), and wrestling.

Although the District offers all of the sports identified above, the District does not offer all of the
sports at every high school. Seven District high schools have an interscholastic athletics
program: Edison, Patrick Henry High School (Henry), North High School (North), Roosevelt
High School (Roosevelt), South High School (South), Southwest High School (Southwest), and
Washburn High School (Washburn). Each school that offers interscholastic athletics
opportunities has a designated AD, and the AD for the school generally has discretion to
determine which sports will be offered at their school.

In addition to the school-specific athletics teams, the District provides some athletics teams
through “Cooperative Sponsorship” (Co-op), which MSHSL defines as a formal agreement
between two or more schools within a school district allowing students from those schools to
compete on a single team. A Co-op is typically formed when a high school has student athletes
who are interested in participating on an athletics team, but the school does not have enough
Page 3 of 35

student athletes to support an individual school team. For the 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 school
years, the District offered Co-op opportunities on District-wide teams for alpine skiing (boys and
girls), hockey (boys and girls), and lacrosse (boys and girls). Individual schools also can form
Co-op teams with other schools, with one school serving as the “host school” and providing its
practice and competitive facilities and locker rooms to the team. During the 2021-2022 school
year, for example, Edison, North and Henry created a Co-op for girls soccer, and Roosevelt,
South and Washburn formed a Co-op for boys and girls swimming and diving.

The District also offers the following adapted sports to boys and girls with disabilities: Bowling,
CI Hockey, PI Hockey, CI Soccer, PI Soccer, CI Softball, PI Softball. However, the District does
not always have participants for all the adapted sports offered and the District AD stated that the
adapted sports do not compete in the MSHSL.

Applicable Legal Standards

The Title IX regulation, at 34 C.F.R. § 106.41(a), states, “No person shall, on the basis of sex, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, be treated differently from another
person or otherwise be discriminated against in any interscholastic athletics offered by a
recipient, and no recipient shall provide any such athletics separately on such basis.” The Title
IX regulation, at 34 C.F.R. § 106.41(c), states, “A recipient which operates or sponsors
interscholastic, intercollegiate, club or intramural athletics shall provide equal athletic
opportunity for members of both sexes.”

Interests and Abilities

The Title IX implementing regulation, at 34 C.F.R. § 106.41(c)(1), and applicable OCR policies,
require a recipient of federal financial assistance from the Department to provide participation
opportunities in its interscholastic athletics program for female and male students that equally
and effectively accommodate the athletic interests and abilities of members of both sexes. The
policies pertaining to the accommodation of athletic interests and abilities include the December
11, 1979, Intercollegiate Athletics Policy Interpretation (Policy Interpretation), at 44 Fed. Reg.
71413 et seq.

OCR uses a three-part test to assess whether the interests and abilities of members of both sexes
are being effectively accommodated to the extent necessary to provide an equal opportunity to
participate in interscholastic athletics. A recipient may demonstrate compliance with Title IX by
demonstrating compliance with any one part of the following three-part test:

  1. The recipient is providing interscholastic athletics participation opportunities for female
     and male students in numbers substantially proportionate to their respective enrollments; or
  2. The recipient has a history and continuing practice of interscholastic athletics program
     expansion that is demonstrably responsive to the developing interests and abilities of
     students who are members of the underrepresented sex; or
  3. The interests and abilities of students who are members of the underrepresented sex have
     been fully and effectively accommodated by the recipient’s current interscholastic athletics
     program.
Page 4 of 35

Each part of the three-part test is an equally sufficient and separate method of complying with
the Title IX regulatory requirement to provide nondiscriminatory athletic participation
opportunities.

Program Components

In addition, the Title IX regulations at 34 C.F.R. § 106.41(c)(2), and (7), require a recipient of
federal financial assistance from the Department to provide equal opportunities in the program
components of the provision of equipment and supplies and the provision of locker rooms,
practice and competitive facilities. OCR uses the Policy Interpretation in determining compliance
with these regulatory provisions. OCR evaluates compliance by comparing the availability,
quality and kinds of benefits, opportunities and treatment afforded members of both sexes. An
institution is in compliance if the compared program components are equivalent; that is, equal or
equal in effect.

OCR examines each factor relating to the benefits, opportunities, or treatment of male and
female athletes in the applicable program component, and determines whether the same or
similar benefits, opportunities or treatment were provided for all students; or if not, whether the
differences had a negative effect on one sex that resulted in a disparity. When OCR identifies
disparities between the boys and girls teams (e.g., if a boys team receives a superior benefit in
some way), OCR considers whether the benefit provided to a team was offset by an unmatched
benefit to any of the teams in the program of the opposite sex. In making this comparison, and
before OCR concludes that a benefit to one team offsets a benefit provided to a team of the
opposite sex, OCR considers whether the offsetting benefits were equivalent or equal in effect.
OCR only finds the benefit offsetting if it has the same or a similar effect on the student
athlete(s) or team within the program component.

If OCR finds no evidence of offsetting of disparities, OCR then considers whether the
differences between the benefits provided to the boys and girls programs are negligible. Where
the disparities are not negligible, OCR examines whether the disparities are the result of
legitimate, nondiscriminatory factors. If OCR finds no legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for
the disparities, OCR determines whether the identified disparities result in the denial of equal
opportunity to male or female athletes, either because the disparities collectively are of a
substantial and unjustified nature or because the disparities in the program component are
substantial enough by themselves to deny equal athletic opportunity. The result of this
comparison is not to ensure identical benefits, opportunities, or treatment, but rather to ensure
that, overall, the athletics program provides equivalent benefits to males and females.

Locker Rooms, Practice and Competitive Facilities

The Policy Interpretation lists six factors to be assessed in determining whether a recipient
provides equal opportunities in the provision of locker rooms, practice and competitive facilities:
(1) the quality and availability of the facilities provided for practice and competitive events; (2)
the exclusivity of use of facilities provided for practice and competitive events; (3) the
availability of locker rooms; (4) the quality of locker rooms; (5) the maintenance of practice and
competitive facilities; and (6) the preparation of facilities for practice and competitive events.
Page 5 of 35

Equipment and Supplies

The Policy Interpretation lists five factors to be assessed in determining whether a recipient
provides equal opportunities in the provision of equipment and supplies: (1) quality; (2) amount;
(3) suitability; (4) maintenance and replacement; and (5) availability of equipment and supplies.

Interests and Abilities

For the 2021-2022 school year, there were approximately 4,324 total participation opportunities
in the District’s interscholastic athletics programs, excluding the adapted sports. The District
provided 2,387 (55.2%) opportunities for boys and 1,937 (44.8%) opportunities for girls.
District-wide, the disparity between the female enrollment rate and their interscholastic athletics
participation rate was 4.1 percentage points. The District would have needed to have provided
approximately 347 more female participation opportunities to achieve a participation rate
substantially proportionate to their enrollment rate, without eliminating any athletic opportunities
for boys in the District. The District does not track and could not identify the teams that it has
eliminated since 1972. The only sports the District reported having added in the last 20 years
were four sports programs in 2007: girls and boys adapted softball, and girls and boys lacrosse.

According to the District AD, the District has not completed a student athletic interest survey in
the past ten years. The District also has not maintained copies of and could not provide OCR
with past surveys or assessments conducted to gauge the students’ athletic interests and abilities.
No school-level AD reported to OCR having conducted surveys specifically for the purpose of
determining unmet student interest and abilities in athletics. The District AD also confirmed that
the District does not have written policies, procedures, or criteria for determining how and
whether sports and/or levels will be added or elevated to the interscholastic athletics program, a
written procedure for requesting additional interscholastic athletics opportunities, or a process for
assessing or responding to such requests. The District does not have a plan in place for athletics
program expansion. School-level ADs also did not identify any specific procedures that they are
following when determining whether to add additional interscholastic athletics teams or levels.

District High Schools Without Substantial Proportionality

The District does not provide interscholastic athletics participation opportunities for male and
female student athletes in numbers substantially proportionate to enrollment rates at Edison,
Henry, North and South, and the disproportionality favors males.

Edison

During the 2021-2022 school year, Edison offered opportunities for students to participate on 11
boys and 12 girls teams, in addition to the three District Co-op teams per sex. No female Edison
student participated on a District Co-op team in 2021-2022. Edison participated in Co-op teams
with North and Henry for girls soccer, and boys and girls Nordic ski. Edison does not cut
potential participants from its interscholastic athletics program, with the exception of boys
soccer. During the 2021-2022 school year, Edison had a total enrollment of 934 students, with
462 female and 470 male students, and provided 120 participation opportunities for female
students and 240 for male students, representing a 16.2% difference in enrollment and athletic
participation rate in favor of male students. Edison would need to provide 115 more female
Page 6 of 35

opportunities to achieve exact proportionality in its athletics opportunities proportionate to its
enrollment rates, which is higher than the average roster size for the girls teams offered.

Henry

During the 2021-2022 school year, Henry offered opportunities for students to participate on 9
boys and 9 girls teams, in addition to the three District Co-op teams per sex. However, no Henry
students participated on any of the District-wide Co-op teams. According to [redacted content],
Henry has participated on Co-op teams with North and Edison for girls soccer, and boys and
girls Nordic ski, and with North for girls softball and tennis. Henry does not cut potential
participants from any of its interscholastic athletics teams. During the 2021-2022 school year,
Henry had a total student enrollment of 918 students, with 444 female and 472 male students,
and provided 143 participation opportunities for female students and 207 for male students,
representing a 7.5% difference in enrollment and athletic participation rate in favor of male
students. Henry would need to provide 51 more female opportunities to achieve exact
proportionality in its athletics opportunities proportionate to its enrollment rates, which is higher
than the average roster size for the girls teams offered by Henry.

North

During the 2021-2022 school year, North offered opportunities for students to participate on 9
boys and 8 girls teams, in addition to the three District Co-Op teams per sex. No students from
North participated in the District’s Co-op hockey or lacrosse teams and only one male student
participated on the District-wide Co-op alpine skiing team. North does not cut participants from
its interscholastic athletics teams. During the 2021-2022 school year, North had a total
enrollment of 436 students, with 192 female and 244 male students, and provided 93
participation opportunities for female students and 189 for male students, representing an 11.0%
difference in enrollment and athletic participation rate in favor of male students. North would
need to provide 55 more female opportunities to achieve exact proportionality in its athletics
opportunities proportionate to its enrollment rates, which is higher than the average roster size
for the girls teams offered by North.

South

During the 2021-2022 school year, South offered opportunities for students to participate on 11
boys and 12 girls teams, in addition to the three District Co-op teams per sex. South does not cut
potential participants from its interscholastic athletics program, with the exception of boys
basketball. During the 2021-2022 school year, South had a total enrollment of 1587 students,
with 778 female and 796 male students, and provided 229 participation opportunities for females
and 330 for males, representing an 8% difference in enrollment and athletic participation rate in
favor of male students. South would need to provide 88 more female opportunities to achieve
exact proportionality in its athletics opportunities proportionate to its enrollment rates, which is
higher than the average roster size for the girls teams offered by South.
Page 7 of 35

District High Schools with Substantial Proportionality

Roosevelt, Southwest and Washburn

During the 2021-2022 school year, Roosevelt, Southwest and Washburn offered opportunities
for students to participate on 11 boys and 12 girls teams, in addition to the three District Co-op
teams per sex. The number of athletic opportunities each of these schools would need to provide
the underrepresented sex in order to achieve exact proportionality is lower than the average
roster size for the school’s teams of that sex. Therefore, the District provided interscholastic
athletics participation opportunities for male and female student athletes at Roosevelt, Southwest
and Washburn in numbers substantially proportionate to their enrollment rates in 2021-2022.

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities

The District utilizes on-campus facilities at the District high schools offering interscholastic
athletics opportunities, off-campus facilities at other District schools, off-campus Park District
facilities, and off-campus private facilities for its high school interscholastic athletic programs.

[Redacted content] told OCR that the District owns and operates two facilities not located at a
District high school that District high schools utilize for practice and competitive events (North
Star Gymnasium and Northeast Middle School Pool). The District also stated to OCR that they
have a contract with the Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board (Park Board) that allows
District schools to rent Park District facilities for its interscholastic athletics program.
Additionally, the District pays to use other facilities not managed and operated by the Park
Board, such as golf courses and cross-country skiing courses. The District AD noted that
multiple high schools use some of the same off-campus facilities. The ADs and athletes told
OCR that the District does not provide transportation to practices for students who participate on
Co-op teams or who practice at facilities that are not located on their school’s campus. ADs and
athletes reported that for some teams, the school provides transportation on rented yellow buses
to competitions. Additionally, some athletes and ADs reported to OCR that coaches use
discretionary funds to rent charter buses for competitive events, and female athletes told OCR
that boys teams were provided higher quality transportation to competitions.

OCR inspected the facilities utilized by the District’s interscholastic athletics teams during an
onsite visit to the District in May and June 2023. Unless indicated, OCR observed the on-campus
District high school facilities, including locker rooms, to be generally clean and well-maintained
by the high school’s custodial and building grounds staff. Additionally, the school-level ADs
told OCR that they, along with the building staff, prepare the on-campus facilities for practices
and competitive events, with the exceptions noted below. Overall, OCR found the facilities
located at the seven high schools to be of average to above-average quality, of regulation size,
designed specifically and with appropriate markings for the sport or sports practicing and/or
competing in the facility, and to have standard amenities for the sport or sports utilizing the
facilities. Unless noted below, OCR’s inspection determined that each high school’s gymnasium
has standard amenities for the sports offered, including floor markings and other built-in
equipment (basketball hoops, floor post holes), bright overhead lighting, an electronic scoreboard
and public address (PA) system, and spectator bleacher seating, as well as suitable public
facilities including a ticket area, concession area, drinking fountain and public restroom. Also
unless noted below, OCR observed that each high school’s outdoor stadium has appropriate
Page 8 of 35

amenities for the sports offered that consists of a grass or turf field sufficient to hold a
regulation-sized football and/or soccer field, surrounded by a rubber-surface track appropriately
marked for track and field, permanent goal posts, permanent stadium-style bleachers, a press
box, an electronic scoreboard and PA system, stadium lighting, as well as suitable public
facilities including a ticket area, concession stand, and plumbed restrooms.

With respect to the Park Board facilities, the Park Board manages, operates, and maintains the
facilities. The Park Board staff maintain, set-up and prepare the facility for practices and
competitions. Unless noted, OCR observed the Park Board facilities to be generally clean and
well-maintained without any concerns identified regarding preparation. OCR found all private
facilities used by the District to be high quality, well-maintained and clean.

Off-site Facilities: Baseball

The District’s high school boys baseball teams practice and compete at several parks that are
managed, operated and maintained by the Park Board, including Bossen Park, Neiman Sports
Complex, North Commons Park, Northeast Athletic Field Park, Parade Baseball Field, Killebrew
Field at Pearl Park, and Van Cleve Park. Except for Henry, no District high school has an on-
campus baseball facility. In addition, some female student athletes told OCR that, unlike the
softball teams, the baseball teams have been provided the opportunity to compete at Target Field,
a Major League Baseball facility. The baseball teams have exclusive use of the fields during
practices times and competitive events, and the facilities are always available to them during
their scheduled practices and competitions.

Bossen Park

All levels of the Roosevelt boys baseball teams practice and compete at the Bossen Park baseball
field. The Bossen Park baseball field is specifically designed for baseball, but is not regulation,
the field appears poorly maintained, with several patches of dried grass and weeds growing in the
field and areas where grass is missing. The Bossen Park field lacks any amenities including
dugouts, foul line and home run fencing, lights, a scoreboard, and PA system. The field has a set
of permanent spectator metal bleachers on each baseline that appear to be in good condition and
has portable restrooms.

Neiman Sports Complex

Situated on 50 acres of land, the Neiman Sports Complex has multiple baseball, softball, and
soccer fields. The Washburn Varsity baseball team competes at the Neiman Sports Complex
baseball fields, which are specifically designed and regulation for boys baseball, of high quality
and have all standard baseball amenities including a backstop, foul line and home run fencing,
foul poles, two enclosed dugouts with metal benches, an electronic scoreboard, overhead
lighting, a pitcher’s warm-up area, an enclosed hitting area, and bleacher seating for spectators.
OCR observed the condition of the grass fields to be good, with a few areas that are not level and
patches of dry grass. The facility has portable restrooms.

North Commons Park

All levels of North boys baseball teams practice and compete at the North Commons Park
baseball field. The North Commons Park baseball field is specifically designed and regulation
Page 9 of 35

for boys baseball, of high quality with a turf field that has permanent markings for baseball. The
field has all standard baseball amenities including a backstop, foul line and home run fencing,
foul poles, two enclosed dugouts with metal benches, an electronic scoreboard, a pitcher’s warm-
up area, and two 4-row metal bleachers for spectator seating located on each sideline near home
plate. However, the facility lacks lighting for night play. The facility has a portable restroom.

Northeast Athletic Field Park

The Northeast Baseball Diamonds (NBD), located within the Northeast Athletic Field Park,
consists of two regulation baseball diamonds with grass infields and outfields. The Edison
Varsity boys baseball team practices and competes on Field #1 and the JV and B-squad teams
practice and compete on Field #2. The two fields are specifically designed and regulation for
boys baseball, and of high quality. Field #1 has all standard baseball amenities including a
backstop, foul line and home run fencing, foul poles, enclosed cinder block dugouts, overhead
lighting, an electronic scoreboard, a pitcher’s warm-up area, an enclosed hitting area, and three
sets of spectator seating benches. Field #2 is fully fenced with backstop and foul poles, has an
electronic scoreboard, partially enclosed dugouts, and a spectator area. However, Field #2 is not
lighted, and there is no pitcher warm-up area or enclosed hitting area. The fields are in excellent
condition, freshly mown, level, and clear of debris. OCR likewise observed the dirt infields to be
level, raked, and clear of debris. Indoor plumbed public restrooms are located between Field #1
and Field #2 in a separate building.

Parade Baseball Field

Parade Baseball Field is located in “Parade Park,” which is about 45 acres and contains a
baseball field, a football/soccer field, a softball field, and an ice arena. OCR’s review of the
competitive schedules of the teams indicates that Edison, Southwest, Roosevelt and Washburn
all play baseball games at Parade. The Parade Baseball Field is a high-quality facility specifically
designed and regulation for baseball, with all standard baseball amenities including a backstop,
foul line and home run fencing, foul poles, two enclosed dugouts with metal benches, an
electronic scoreboard, overhead lighting, a pitcher’s warm-up area, an enclosed hitting area, and
permanent metal bleacher seating for spectators. The facility also has a press box, permanent
concession stand, and portable restrooms. The baseball field appears very well maintained, with
level, evenly mowed grass that does not have any bald or patchy spots.

Pearl Park - Killebrew Field

All levels of the Washburn boys baseball teams practice and compete at the Pearl Park baseball
field, Killebrew Field. Killebrew Field is specifically designed and regulation for boys baseball,
of high quality and has all standard baseball amenities including a backstop, foul line and home
run fencing, foul poles, two enclosed dugouts with metal benches, an electronic scoreboard,
overhead lighting, and bleacher seating for spectators. The baseball field appears well
maintained, with level grass that has a few bald areas and patchy spots. The facility has portable
restrooms located adjacent to the baseball field.
Page 10 of 35

Van Cleve Field

All levels of South boys baseball practice and compete at the Van Cleve Park baseball field. The
Van Cleve Park baseball field is specifically designed for baseball. OCR was unable to
determine whether the outfield is regulation distance from home plate. The baseball field has a
backstop, foul line and home run fencing, foul poles, two enclosed cinder block dugouts, a
pitcher’s warm-up area, and permanent metal bleacher seating for spectators, but lacks a PA
system, a scoreboard, and lighting. OCR could not identify nearby restrooms.

Off-site Facilities: Softball

The District’s high school softball teams practice and compete on softball fields at several parks
that are managed, operated and maintained by the Park Board, including Bossen Park, Creekview
Park, Jackson Square Park, Pearl Park, and Pershing Park. No District high school has an on-
campus softball facility. The softball teams have exclusive use of their fields during their
practice and competitive events; however, as noted below, coaches, athletes and the ADs all told
OCR that the softball teams are regularly displaced from their fields at 6pm due an adult men’s
recreational softball league, which they referred to as the “beer league,” regardless of whether
they have completed their game.

Bossen Park

Bossen Park includes six softball fields that are specifically designed for softball, but according
to the student athletes and school-level ADs, are not regulation for fast-pitch softball. All levels
of the girls softball teams at Roosevelt and South practice and compete, and all levels of
Washburn compete at the Bossen Park softball fields. The softball fields are newer and of good
quality, with standard softball amenities including an all brick-dust infield with a grass outfield,
backstop fencing, foul line and home run fencing with yardage markings, foul poles, two
enclosed dugouts, and overhead lighting. However, the fields do not have scoreboards or a PA
system. The facility has portable restrooms.

The Bossen Park softball fields are not always available to the girls softball teams because the
fields are used by the Park District’s men’s beer league teams. In addition to the softball teams
only having access to the fields until 6pm for competitions, regardless of whether a practice or
game has concluded, softball athletes noted that often, the men’s beer league teams arrive before
their scheduled 6pm start time and the girls softball teams no longer have access to the fields.

Creekview Park

All levels of the Henry girls softball teams practice and compete at Creekview Park. Creekview
Park has one main softball field and one auxiliary field. The main field is of poor quality and
contains a softball diamond with an all brick dust infield, a backstop, foul line and home run
fencing, outfield fencing and two sets of viewing bleachers, but has uncovered bench dugouts,
and does not have lighting, a PA system or a scoreboard. The Creekview Park auxiliary field is
located northeast of the main softball field and is not regulation for the sport. It contains a dirt
infield with a backstop, but lacks a dugout or other player seating, spectator seating, lights,
fencing, a PA system and a scoreboard. The fields are not well maintained, and OCR noted
weeds growing in the infield.
Page 11 of 35

Jackson Square Park Softball Diamond

All levels of Edison girls softball practice and compete at the Jackson Square Park softball field.
Jackson Square Park is located across the street from Edison, roughly 100 feet from the school.
The Jackson Square Park softball field is designed specifically for softball but is not regulation
for fast-pitch softball. Although the dirt infield can fit a regulation size diamond with safe
distances to foul ball obstructions, the space from the bases to the outfield are not symmetrical,
and the outfield grass is patchy with noticeable weeds. The softball field has a brick and metal
fence backstop and home run fencing, but lacks foul line fencing, lighting, a scoreboard, a PA
system, and spectator seating. The softball field has benches with screens instead of enclosed
dugouts. OCR noted that plumbed indoor restrooms may be available near the playground on the
opposite end of the park.

Pearl Park

Washburn girls softball teams practice and sometimes compete at the Pearl Park softball field,
which is designed specifically for softball but is not regulation for fast-pitch softball, and is of
poor quality. The Pearl Park softball field has lighting but lacks other basic softball amenities of
foul line and home run fencing, dugouts, spectator seating, scoreboards, and a PA system. The
quality of the outfield grass is poor, with significant bald and patchy spots, and has markings for
football and soccer.

Pershing Park

All levels of the Southwest girls softball teams practice and compete at the Pershing Park softball
field, which is designed specifically for softball, but is not regulation for fast-pitch softball.
Pershing Park softball field is of poor quality with no amenities. The softball field has backstop
fencing but lacks foul line and home run fencing. The outfield grass has patchy areas and is not
level. Softball athletes have access to the restrooms at Southwest Stadium, located adjacent to the
softball field outfield.

Off-site Facilities: Tennis

The District’s high school boys and girls tennis teams practice and compete at tennis courts at
several parks that are managed, operated and maintained by the Park Board. No District high
school has an on-campus tennis facility.

OCR observed the tennis courts at Folwell Park, Kenwood Park, Lake Hiawatha Park, Linden
Hills Park, Lynnhurst Park, Morgan Park, Northeast Athletic Field Park, Pershing Park,
Powderhorn Park, and Webber Park. With the exception of North Commons Park, each of these
parks includes four to eight tennis courts, with a synthetic rubber on asphalt court surface that is
adequately marked for tennis. North Commons Park includes two tennis courts. All of the courts
are specifically designed and appeared to be regulation-size for the sport. The tennis courts
observed by OCR generally were level, with few to no cracks or signs of other disrepair.
However, OCR observed the tennis courts at North Commons Park, used by North boys tennis
team for practices, to be cracked and in need of resurfacing with weeds growing in the cracks
and under the net. The Webber Park tennis courts, used by all levels of Henry boys and girls
teams for practices and competitions, also are in very poor condition with many cracks and other
Page 12 of 35

signs of disrepair. All the tennis court areas are enclosed by a chain link fence. None of the
courts have electronic scoreboards, PA systems, or designated spectator seating. Only the
Pershing Park courts, used by the Southwest boys and girls tennis teams for practices and
competitions, have overhead lighting.

Off-site Facilities: Used by Multiple Teams

Cross Country: Gale Woods Farm (GWF)

All levels of boys and girls cross country from Edison, Roosevelt, South, Southwest, and
Washburn practice occasionally and compete at GWF, a facility owned and operated by the
Three Rivers Park District located in Minnetrista, Minnesota. GWF is primarily a farming,
nature, and community center with over 27,000 acres of parks and trails. During cross country
events, the trails are closed off from public use. GWF has a designated start line and finish area
for cross country races. GWF offers pavilions, restrooms, and an air-conditioned visitor’s
center/store. During an onsite visit, OCR observed many of the trails to be in excellent condition.

Golf: Columbia Golf Course, Meadowbrook Golf Club, and Theodore Wirth Golf Course

The District high school boys and girls golf teams practice and compete at several public Park
Board golf courses, including Columbia Golf Course, Meadowbrook Golf Club, and Theodore
Wirth Golf Course, which OCR visited. Both the boys and girls golf teams use and have access
to the same facilities and amenities at each course. Each course has standard amenities for golf
and suitable public facilities, and the grounds are in very good condition. The courses, based on
distance and difficulty, do not favor one sex over another.

Gymnastics: North Star Gym

The North Star Gym is a District facility for use exclusively by the District’s high school
gymnastics programs. [Redacted content] told OCR that because North Star Gym is the primary
and home facility for all of the District’s gymnastics teams, all the schools generally practice and
compete at the same times. Blue mats cover the gym floor which is sectioned off for different
gymnastics events (e.g., uneven parallel bars). Multiple tables and chairs are set up for officials.
There also are 2 sets of portable aluminum bleachers for spectators on one side of the wall. The
District AD stated that the gym is designed to allow for livestreaming gymnastic competitions.
The facility also has a girls locker room that includes a sufficient number of lockers for each
District athlete who participates in gymnastics, wooden benches, individual restroom stalls,
sinks, mirrors, a soap and a paper towel dispenser, and an open shower area that had 5 individual
showerheads mounted onto the wall. OCR observed the locker room to be clean and well-
maintained.

Nordic Ski: Theodore Wirth Regional Park

Varsity boys and girls Nordic ski teams from all District high schools with interscholastic
athletics participants (Edison, Henry, North, Roosevelt, South, Southwest and Washburn)
practice and compete at the Theodore Wirth Regional Park, which has a 2.1 km hiking trail
course used for Nordic skiing from mid-November to early-April. OCR was informed that the
Loppet Foundation, a non-profit organization, maintains the trails through a partnership with the
Park Board, which owns the facility. The facility has public indoor restrooms, but no public
Page 13 of 35

locker rooms. OCR was unable to assess the maintenance of the trail or facilities due to the
onsite visit occurring in the offseason.

Swimming and Diving: Phillips Park Aquatic Center

The South, Roosevelt and Washburn boys and girls swim teams practices and compete at the
Phillips Park Aquatic Center, a Park Board facility. Phillips Park Aquatic Center has a 25-yard
indoor competition pool with six lanes, each with its own starting block, and a 1-meter diving
board with a dedicated lane located in the middle of the pool, an electronic scoreboard and timer,
concrete floors in good condition, a spectator balcony area with 5 rows of permanent metal
bleachers, an upper balcony area without seats, and public restrooms. OCR did not inspect any
locker rooms at the facility or observe locker rooms near the pool.

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities: District-wide Co-op Sports

For the District-wide Co-op sports, the athletes on the alpine ski and hockey teams use the same
facilities as the sport of the opposite sex and are given equivalent access to the facility for
practices and competitions. The District utilizes the Hyland Hills Ski Area, which is owned and
operated by the Three Rivers Park District located in Bloomington, Minnesota, for boys and girls
Alpine ski. The District utilizes Northeast Ice Arena and Parade Ice Arena, both managed,
operated and maintained by the Park Board, for its boys and girls hockey teams. The hockey
facilities are specifically designed for the sport with appropriate amenities and public facilities.
For the District-wide Co-op lacrosse teams, the boys lacrosse team practices and competes at
North and the girls lacrosse team practices and competes at South (described in more detail
below).

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities: Edison

The Edison interscholastic high school athletics program uses the following facilities that are
located on the Edison campus: Edison Stadium and Edison Community Gym. Edison uses the
following off-campus facilities for practices and competitive events: Northeast Athletic Field
(boys baseball, boys and girls tennis), Gale Woods Farm (boys and girls cross country), North
Star (girls gymnastics), Theodore Wirth (boys and girls Nordic ski), Jackson Square Park (girls
softball), Hyland Hills (boys and girls swimming – competition only), Northeast Middle School
(boys and girl swimming – practice only).

Edison Stadium

Edison Stadium is located across the street to the west of Edison. Edison Stadium was first built
in 1932 and last renovated in 2016. In the fall, the Edison football team and boys soccer team
practice and compete at Edison Stadium. (The girls soccer team previously used Edison Stadium
for practices and competitions until they joined a Co-op hosted by another school). In the spring,
boys and girls track and field teams share Edison Stadium for practice and competitive events.

Edison Stadium has standard amenities for football, soccer and track and field, and has suitable
public facilities. The facility also has a smaller, adjacent grass auxiliary field to the southeast of
the main field. During the on-site visit, OCR noted that the main and auxiliary fields of Edison
Stadium, although level, have hard, dry ground and the grass is thin and patchy in some areas.
Players and coaches rated the maintenance of Edison Stadium as good to poor.
Page 14 of 35

Edison Community Gym

Edison Community Gym (ECG) was built in 1977 and sits across the street to the west of the
original Edison High School building. The two buildings are connected by two underground
tunnels. During the fall, the Edison girls volleyball teams practice and compete in the ECG.
During the winter, the Edison boys and girls basketball teams practice and compete and the boys
wrestling team competes in the ECG. The boys wrestling team practices in the wrestling room
located in the basement of the ECG. The girls’ badminton team practices and competes in the
ECG during the spring.

The ECG has standard amenities for basketball, volleyball, and badminton, can accommodate
wrestling rings, and has suitable public facilities. OCR noted the floor was freshly refinished
with markings for each sport court. The ECG wrestling room is an L-shaped room with space for
numerous mats, padded walls, and sufficient space for four to six wrestling circles.

Northeast Middle School Swimming Pool (Off-Campus District facility)

The Edison boys and girls swimming and diving teams practice at the Northeast Middle School
Swimming Pool (Northeast Pool), located inside Northeast Middle School, which is a District
middle school, approximately 1.7 miles from Edison. The Northeast Pool is a 75-foot long by 35-
foot wide pool, with lane dividers for five lanes, that can facilitate one-meter diving. There are
two elevated viewing platforms with bleachers on each side of the pool. The pool has regulation
backstroke spotting flags, and the facility has starting blocks (although not out at the time of
OCR’s inspection). OCR observed the pool water to be clean and clear. The facility is well lit,
and the pool deck organized. The facility has a boys and girls locker room, with typical locker
room amenities, that are mirrors of each other except slightly different toilet area configurations.

Exclusive Use and Availability

All Edison teams have exclusive use of their facility for practices and competitive events, except
for the boys and girls track and field teams who share the facility with the same team of the
opposite sex. During the fall, Edison Stadium is not always available to the boys soccer and the
football teams for practices when the other team is using it for practice or a competitive event.
Similarly, the ECG is not always available to the boys and girls basketball teams, as they share
the facility. Additionally, the girls softball teams have been required to end games prior to
completion because an adult men’s beer league uses the facility.

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities: Henry

The Henry interscholastic high school athletics program uses the following facilities that are
located on the Henry campus: Henry Main Gym, Henry Old Gym, Cassidy Field, and Swanson
Field. Henry uses the following off-campus facilities for practices and competitive events: Gale
Woods Farm (boys and girls cross country), Theodore Wirth (boys and girls Nordic ski),
Creekview Park (girls softball), Webber Park (boys and girls tennis).

Main Gym

The Main Gym is located in the school’s main building. During the fall season, the girls
interscholastic and boys club volleyball teams practice and compete in the Main Gym. In the
Page 15 of 35

winter, the boys and girls basketball teams practice and compete in the Main Gym, and the
wrestling team uses the Main Gym for competitions. In the spring, the girls interscholastic and
boys club badminton teams practice and compete in the Main Gym.

The Main Gym has standard amenities for basketball, volleyball, and badminton, and has
suitable public facilities. The Main Gym floor was sanded and repainted with markings for
basketball, volleyball, and badminton in the summer of 2022.

Old Gym and Auxiliary Space

Henry retained its original gymnasium (Old Gym), dating back to the 1920s, and an adjacent
auxiliary space as occasional practice facilities for some of its athletic teams. During the winter,
the wrestling team practices in these spaces. Both facilities appear to be in poor condition and
have no amenities.

Swanson Field

Swanson Field is located approximately 0.3 miles southeast of Henry. The football and boys and
girls soccer teams practice and compete at Swanson Field in the fall. The boys and girls track and
field teams practice and compete at Swanson Field in spring.

Swanson Field has standard amenities for those sports but lacks permanent public restrooms and
potable drinking water. [Redacted content] told OCR that the field is not regulation for football.
The field grass is of average to below average quality, with some bald spots and unlevel areas.
The track, however, is made of a rubberized surface in very good condition, without cracks or
holes. Two portable restrooms are located near the main entrance to the field.

Cassidy Field

Cassidy Field is located directly west of Swanson Field. The boys baseball teams practice and
compete at Cassidy Field during the spring. [Redacted content] told OCR that occasionally the
boys and girls soccer teams practice in the outfield of Cassidy Field in the fall (when Swanson
Field is not available), and sometimes the junior varsity track and field teams use the field as a
throwing area for practice.

The baseball field is specifically designed and regulation for boys baseball, of high quality and
includes a backstop, foul line and home run fencing, foul poles, an electronic scoreboard, two
covered dugouts, metal benches, and a pitcher’s practice area, but lacks overhead lighting.
Cassidy Field and Swanson Field share the use of their concession stand/ticket area, press box
and portable restrooms, and Cassidy Field similarly lacks potable drinking water.

Exclusive Use and Availability

All Henry teams have exclusive use of their facility for practices and competitions, except for the
boys and girls track and field teams who share their facility with the same team of the opposite
sex. As for availability, the football and boys and girls soccer teams use Swanson Field for
practices and competitions during the fall, the boys and girls basketball teams both use the Main
Gym for practices and competitions during the winter, and the girls volleyball and girls
badminton teams share their facility with boys club teams of the same sport, despite these boys
Page 16 of 35

club sports not being MSHSL-sanctioned sports. Additionally, [redacted content] stated that
during the 2022-2023 school year, Creekview Park, the facility used by the girls softball team,
was not ready for usage and as a result, the girls softball team had to conduct some practices and
competitions in the parking lot.

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities: North

The North interscholastic high school athletics program uses the following facilities that are
located on or near the North campus: Jacobi Gym and Hobbs Field. North uses the following off-
campus facilities for practices and competitive events: North Commons Park (boys baseball, boy
tennis practice), North Star (girls gymnastics), Theodore Wirth (boys and girls Nordic ski),
Folwell Park (boys tennis competitions).

Main Gym (Jacobi Gym)

The Main Gym is in the school’s main building. The District’s [redacted content] was not aware
when the Main Gym was constructed or when the gym was last renovated. During the fall
season, the girls volleyball teams practice and compete in the Main Gym. In the winter, the boys
and girls basketball teams share the Main Gym for practices and competitions, and the wrestling
team uses the Main Gym for competitions. In the spring, the girls badminton teams practice and
compete in the Main Gym. The Main Gym has standard amenities for basketball, volleyball, and
badminton. It also has suitable public facilities.

North Stadium (Hobbs Field)

North’s outdoor stadium, known as Hobbs Field, is located about 0.4 miles northeast of North.
The football and boys and girls track and field teams practice and compete in the Stadium in the
fall and spring, respectively. The District Co-op boys lacrosse team also practices and competes
in the Stadium in the spring. North Stadium underwent a multimillion-dollar renovation in
approximately 2020. The Stadium contains an artificial turf field that accommodates a
regulation-size football, lacrosse or soccer field that is encircled by a 400-meter, 8-lane track,
with standard amenities for those sports and suitable public facilities. OCR observed the facility
to be of high quality.

Exclusive Use and Availability

All North athletics teams have exclusive use of their facility for practices and competitions,
except for the boys and girls track and field teams who share their facility with the team of the
opposite sex. Additionally, the facilities are generally available to teams, with the exception of
the boys and girls basketball teams who are unable to use the Main Gym when the team of the
opposite sex is using it for practices or competitions.

Preparation

The student athletes did not identify any significant preparation responsibilities, except the girls
volleyball players stated that they set up their own nets for practices, the girls badminton players
set up nets for practices and competitions, and a girls badminton player also indicated that the
players sometimes set up chairs for spectators in lieu of using the bleachers.
Page 17 of 35

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities: Roosevelt

The Roosevelt interscholastic high school athletics program uses the following facilities that are
located on the Roosevelt campus: Al Gowan Field and practice field, Main Gym, South Gym,
North Gym, and the Wrestling Room. Roosevelt uses the following off-campus facilities for
practices and competitive events: Bossen Park (boys baseball, girls softball), Gale Woods Farm
(boys and girls cross country), North Star (girls gymnastics), Theodore Wirth (boys and girls
Nordic ski), Nokomis Park (boys and girls B-squad soccer practice), Hyland Hills (boys and girls
swimming), Lake Hiawatha Park (boys and girls tennis).

Al Gowan Field

Al Gowan Field is located adjacent to Roosevelt to the south and was last renovated in 1998.
During the fall, the Varsity and JV boys football teams, and the Varsity and JV boys and girls
soccer teams practice and compete at Al Gowan Field. The B-squad boys and girls soccer teams
also compete at the facility. In the spring, the boys and girls track and field teams practice at Al
Gowan Field and host one competition.

Al Gowan Stadium has standard amenities for football, soccer, and track and field, and has
suitable public facilities, including a heated building that houses the plumbed restrooms, a
permanent concessions area, and a storage area. The grass field is of average to below average-
quality with some bald spots, mildly bumpy areas, and not level areas. Although OCR observed
the track’s rubberized surface to be in very good condition, without cracks or holes, the
straightaways for jumping events and pole vault are in poor condition with cracked surfaces in
some areas and weeds growing in the cracks.

Directly north of Al Gowan Field (between Al Gowan Field and Roosevelt), is a large field that
primarily is used as a practice field. All levels of the boys football teams and the Varsity and JV
boys and girls soccer teams use the practice field for practices in the fall. The Varsity and JV
boys baseball teams and girls softball teams occasionally practice on the practice field in the
spring. The field had no markings, lights, or other amenities. The field is not level, the grass has
bald and muddy spots, and [redacted content] stated that the field has significant drainage issues.

Main Gym

The Roosevelt Main Gym is a large open space with high ceilings and bright lighting that was
last renovated in the 1970s. During the fall, all levels of the girls volleyball teams compete in the
Main Gym and the Varsity and JV volleyball teams practice in the Main Gym. During the winter,
all levels of the boys and girls basketball teams compete in the Main Gym, the Varsity and JV
boys and girls basketball teams practice in the Main Gym, and the Varsity and JV wrestling
teams compete in the Main gym. During the spring, the girls badminton teams practice and
compete in the Main Gym. The Main Gym has standard amenities for basketball, volleyball, and
badminton. It also has suitable public facilities.

South Gym

The South Gym is a small rectangular room that was constructed in 1923 with high ceilings,
bright lighting, and windows near the ceiling on one side that allow for natural light. The B-
Page 18 of 35

Squad volleyball teams and the B-squad boys and girls basketball teams practice in the South
Gym. The South Gym is not used by Varsity or Junior Varsity teams or for competitive events.

The South Gym is marked for basketball and volleyball, with 6 permanent basketball hoops
around the perimeter and post holes for one volleyball net that were installed in summer 2022,
but no amenities. The basketball court is not regulation in size and does not have all appropriate
markings. Athletes complained that the space is not well ventilated and gets hot during practices.

Wrestling Room

The Wrestling Room is located in Roosevelt’s basement level. The wrestling team practices in
the wrestling room. The floor is covered in padded wrestling mats (non-permanent). The room
has padded walls, with low ceilings and bright overhead lights. The space is not wide enough to
accommodate a full-sized wrestling circle. There is a concrete pole in the middle of one end of
the room, which is covered in padding. The room does not have any amenities, but portable
sound system/speakers are located at one end of the room.

Lake Nokomis Park (Park Board facility)

The Roosevelt B-squad boys and girls soccer teams practice and compete in a field area at Lake
Nokomis Park. Upon visual inspection, however, OCR could not determine the location of the
soccer field because the field is an open grassy area located on a hill with areas that have slopes
and included no marking for soccer at the time of OCR’s visit. The grassy field area is not level,
the quality of the grass field is fair with patches of dry grass. [Redacted content] noted that many
players suffered ankle injuries practicing and playing on that field when they used the field for
soccer practices in the past. The park also includes baseball or softball diamonds, which have
overhead lighting, but there is not designated lighting for the fields where soccer would be
played. OCR could not locate any nearby restrooms.

Exclusive Use and Availability

All Roosevelt athletics teams have exclusive use of their competitive facility for competitions,
except for one co-ed track and field meet each year. Roosevelt teams also generally have
exclusive use of their facilities for practices, except when the boys football teams and the Varsity
and JV boys and girls soccer teams share the Al Gowan practice field for practices. Additionally,
the availability of Al Gowan Field is limited in the fall due to all levels of the football team and
the Varsity and JV boys and girls soccer teams all using the field for practices and competitions.
In the winter, the Main Gym is not always available to the boys and girls basketball teams who
both use it for practices and competitions. Additionally, the Roosevelt girls softball team
routinely is displaced from their practice and competition facility at Bossen Park due to the
men’s beer league having reserved the field beginning at 6pm.

Preparation

[Redacted content] told OCR that the girls volleyball teams are responsible for setting up the nets
and the wrestling team is responsible for setting up the mats for both practices and competitions.
The girls badminton players also reported setting up nets for practices and competitions and
spectator chairs for competitions. A soccer player told OCR that she and her father assembled
Page 19 of 35

and set up the soccer nets at Nokomis Park at the beginning of the season. [Redacted content]
was unaware of this and stated that the Park Board should have set up the soccer nets.

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities: South

The South interscholastic high school athletics program uses the following facilities that are
located on the South campus: Main Gym, South Stadium, South Practice Field, and the
Wrestling Room. South uses the following off-campus facilities for practices and competitive
events: Van Cleve Field (boys baseball), Midtown YWCA Minneapolis Sports Center (boys and
girls basketball – practice only), Gale Woods Farm (boys and girls cross country), North Star
(girls gymnastics), Theodore Wirth (boys and girls Nordic ski), Bossen Park (girls softball),
Hyland Hills (boys and girls swimming – competition only), Phillips (boys and girl swimming
practice and competitions), Powderhorn Park (boys and girls tennis).

Main Gym

During the fall, the girls volleyball teams practice and compete in the Main Gym. During the
winter, all levels of the boys and girls basketball teams practice and compete in the Main Gym,
and the boys wrestling team uses the Main Gym for competitions. The Main Gym has standard
amenities for basketball, volleyball and badminton. It also has suitable public facilities.

South Stadium

South Stadium, located across the street from South’s main building, was renovated in 2019.
During the fall, the Varsity boys football team and the Varsity girls and boys soccer teams
practice and compete in the Stadium. During the spring, the Varsity girls and boys track and field
and the District Co-op girls lacrosse team share the Stadium for practices and competitions.
South Stadium has standard amenities for football, soccer and track and field, and has suitable
public facilities. The football/soccer field is artificial turf.

South Practice Field

The South Practice Field is adjacent to the school’s main building and across the street from
South Stadium. During the fall, the JV girls and boys soccer teams and lower level boys football
teams practice at the Practice Field. The girls lacrosse team occasionally uses the Practice Field
for practice during the spring. The South Practice Field has four removable goal posts and the
grass appeared to be in fair condition without muddy patches or many bald spots. The Practice
Field does not have bleachers, designated seating areas, or other amenities.

Wrestling Room

South also has a wrestling room that is used by the wrestling team for practices. OCR has not yet
inspected the wresting room.

Midtown YWCA Minneapolis Sports Center (Off-campus facility)

The Midtown YWCA is located across the street from the South Stadium and one block
northwest from South’s main building. During the winter, South’s Varsity and JV girls and boys
basketball teams alternate use of the Midtown YWCA for practices. South’s boys and girls track
Page 20 of 35

and field athletes also informed OCR that they use the indoor track and field facilities during
inclement weather. [Redacted content] stated that the District owns the athletic facilities and
leases them to the YWCA. It has four indoor basketball/volleyball courts that appear to be
regulation size and are encircled by a 200-meter 4-lane track. It also has a long jump and pole
vault pit.

Exclusive Use and Availability

All South athletics teams have exclusive use of their competitive facility for competitions, except
for the boys and girls track and field teams who share their facility with the team of the opposite
sex. For practices, the boys and girls soccer teams practice in the same facility at the same time,
and the boys and girls track and field teams share their facility with each other and with the
District Co-op girls lacrosse team, therefore do not have exclusive use of their facilities. South
Stadium is not available to the track and field teams when the lacrosse team is hosting a
competition at the field, and the Main Gym is not always available to the boys and girls
basketball teams when the team of the opposite sex is using it. Additionally, the girls softball
teams are displaced from their facility at 6pm due to the men’s beer league using it, regardless of
whether their competitive event is completed.

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities: Southwest

The Southwest interscholastic high school athletics program uses the following facilities that are
located on the Southwest campus: West Gym, West Auxiliary Gym, East Gym, East Auxiliary
Gym, Southwest Weight Room, Southwest Pool, Southwest Stadium.

Southwest uses the following off-campus facilities for practices and competitive events:
Armatage Park (boys JV and B-squad baseball – practice only, boys and girls soccer – practice
only), Gale Woods Farm (boys and girls cross country), North Star (girls gymnastics), Theodore
Wirth (boys and girls Nordic ski), Lynnhurst Park (boys soccer – practice only) Pershing Park
(boys football – practice only, girls softball, boys and girls tennis), Hyland Hills (boys and girls
Alpine ski, boys and girls swimming – competition only), Linden Hills (boys and girls tennis).

West Gym

The West Gym, located on the first floor of Southwest main building, is the largest gym at
Southwest. The West Gym is a large modern, open space that has standard amenities for
basketball, volleyball, and badminton, and has suitable public facilities. The West Gym’s
flooring was replaced around 1998 or 1999 and is wooden with markings for basketball and
volleyball. During the fall, the girls Varsity and JV volleyball teams practice and compete in the
West Gym. During the winter, all levels of the boys and girls basketball teams practice and
compete in the West Gym; however, the lower level basketball teams primarily practice in the
East Gym. The boys wrestling team uses the West Gym for competitions and occasionally for
practices. During the spring, the girls badminton teams practice and compete in the West Gym.

East Gym

The East Gym is smaller in size than the West Gym, but larger than the auxiliary gyms
(described below) and is used only for practices. The B-Squad and 9th grade girls volleyball
teams practice in the East Gym in the fall, the boys and girls B-Squad and 9th grade basketball
Page 21 of 35

teams practice in the East Gym during the winter, and the girls badminton teams use the East
Gym for practices in the spring. The East Gym’s flooring is wooden and has markings for
basketball and volleyball. The East Gym includes one regulation-sized basketball and/or
volleyball court or can be divided into 2 separate “short” courts for basketball and/or volleyball.
The East Gym has standard amenities for basketball and volleyball.

West Auxiliary Gym

The west auxiliary gym is a smaller rectangular room approximately 50 by 60 feet with
approximately 20-foot ceilings. The wrestling team primarily practices in the West Auxiliary
Gym during the winter season. [Redacted content] stated that during the winter season, when the
wrestling team uses the facility, the floor is also lined with wrestling mats. The gym’s floor is
covered with black rubber and has no markings.

East Auxiliary Gym

The east auxiliary gym is similar in size to the west auxiliary gym. The boys baseball and girls
softball teams primarily use the east auxiliary gym for practice batting. Unlike the west auxiliary
gym, the east auxiliary gym’s flooring appears to be made of linoleum tiles, with 3 large circle
markings on the floor.

Southwest Pool

During the fall and winter, the Southwest Varsity and JV girls swimming and diving teams and
Varsity and JV boys swimming and diving teams use the Southwest Pool for practices and some
competitions. [Redacted content] explained that because the boys and girls swimming and diving
teams are currently in Co-ops with other District high schools, they practice with boys and girls
swimming and diving participants from Co-op high school teams. The Co-ops have exclusive use
of the pool for their practices. The Southwest pool is a 25-yard lap pool that is approximately 5
to 6 feet deep and has 6 swimming lanes with dividers, each with its own starting block. The
ceiling is approximately 15-20 feet high, although there was sufficient lighting, the lighting was
dimmed. The floor tile appears to be in good condition. A large electronic scoreboard is located
on a wall in a corner. The Southwest pool has suitable public facilities.

Southwest Stadium

Southwest Stadium is located approximately 2 blocks from Southwest. During the fall, the
Varsity and JV boys football teams, and Varsity and JV boys and girls soccer teams practice and
compete at the Stadium. In the spring, the boys and girls track and field teams share the Stadium
for practice and host several competitions at the Stadium. Southwest Stadium has standard
amenities for football, soccer and track and field. It also has suitable public facilities.

Armatage Park and Lynnhurst Park (Park Board facilities)

All levels of the Southwest girls and boys soccer teams sometimes practice at Armatage Park,
and all levels of the Southwest boys soccer teams also sometimes practice at Lynnhurst Park.
Both fields are Park Board facilities. The Armatage Park soccer field appears to be regulation-
size based on the location of the removable goal posts on opposite sides of the field; however,
OCR did not observe any visible soccer markings on the field. The quality of the grass field is
Page 22 of 35

poor, with several patches of dried grass and weeds, and the field does not have any amenities.
OCR also did not observe restrooms in the park. The Lynnhurst soccer field appears to be of
regulation-size based on the faint markings on the field, with well-maintained and level grass. It
has no amenities or permanent goal posts/nets. A building located in the park appeared to have
restrooms, but OCR did not confirm the times in which the restrooms are unlocked and available
to be used by the athletes.

Exclusive Use and Availability

All of Southwest’s athletic teams have exclusive use of their competitive facilities for
competitions. All teams generally have exclusive use of their practice facility for practices as
well, except for teams that sometimes practice with the same team of the opposite sex. As to
availability, in the fall, the upper level boys football teams, boys soccer teams, and girls soccer
teams use the Stadium for practices and competitions, so it is not always available to them.
Similarly, both the boys and girls basketball teams use the West Gym and East Gym for practices
and competitions during the winter, so these facilities are not always available.

Preparation

[Redacted content] told OCR that the girls volleyball and girls badminton teams are responsible
for preparing the gyms for both practices and competitions. Additionally, [redacted content] and
student athletes stated that the girls softball athletes and their coach are responsible for putting up
the fence at Pershing Park because it does not have any fencing.

Practice Facilities and Competitive Facilities: Washburn

The Washburn interscholastic high school athletics program uses the following facilities that are
located on the Washburn campus: Main Gym, Gym 103, Wrestling Mat Room, and Washburn
Stadium. Washburn uses the following off-campus facilities for practices and competitive events:
Neiman Field Sports Complex (boys baseball – competition only), Pearl Park (boys baseball,
boys and girls soccer – practice only, girls softball), Gale Woods Farm (boys and girls cross
country), North Star (girls gymnastics), Theodore Wirth (boys and girls Nordic ski), Bossen
Field (girls softball – competition only), Phillips Pool (boys and girls swimming), Lynnhurst
Park (boys soccer – practice only; boys and girls tennis – practice only), Kenwood Park and
Morgan Park (boys and girls tennis).

Main Gym

The Washburn Main Gym has appropriate amenities for basketball, volleyball and badminton,
and suitable public facilities. During the fall, the girls volleyball teams practice and compete in
the Main Gym. During the winter, all levels of the boys and girls basketball teams practice and
compete in the Main Gym and the boys wrestling teams use the Main Gym for competitions.
During the spring, the girls badminton team practices and competes in the Main Gym.

Washburn Auxiliary (Gym 103)

The auxiliary gym, referred to as Gym 103, contains what appears to be one regulation-sized
basketball and volleyball court, as well as three badminton courts. No teams are assigned to use
Gym 103 for practices or competitive events. However, some girls basketball athletes reported
Page 23 of 35

that on rare occasions, they continued their practices in Gym 103 after being displaced from the
Main Gym. Gym 103 has no amenities.

Wrestling Mat Room

The Wrestling Mat Room is a rectangular room approximately 55 feet by 50 feet, adjacent to
Gym 103. The wrestling team practices in the wrestling mat room. The room’s walls and floors
are covered in pads. The mat room has a private, single stall bathroom attached, as well as a
furnace room that is used for storage.

Washburn Stadium

Washburn Stadium is located adjacent to the east of the main building. During the fall, the boys
football teams practice and compete in Washburn Stadium, and the boys and girls soccer teams
use the Stadium for competitions. During the spring, the boys and girls track and field teams
practice and compete in Washburn Stadium. [Redacted content] indicated that Washburn
Stadium is scheduled to undergo renovations in 2024. Washburn Stadium has appropriate
amenities for football, soccer and track and suitable public facilities. The field is artificial turf.
The track is made of asphalt and the markings are worn and not visible in some places. A large
grassy field approximately 55 feet by 50 feet located between the main high school building and
Washburn Stadium is referred to as the “Mall Area”. [Redacted content] stated that the lower
levels of football use the Mall Area for practice and occasionally the boys soccer team uses the
Mall Area for practice as well. The Mall Area field has no markings and does not have any
specific amenities.

Pearl Park (Park Board facility)

All levels of the Washburn boys and girls soccer teams use seven grass soccer fields at Pearl
Park for practice. [Redacted content] did not know if any of the soccer fields are regulation size.
The fields appear well maintained, with fresh striping and appropriate markings for soccer, but
have no amenities or permanent goal posts/nets. OCR did not identify restrooms near the fields.

Exclusive Use and Availability

All of Washburn’s athletic teams have exclusive use of their competitive facilities for
competitions. All teams generally have exclusive use of their practice facility for practices as
well, except for teams that sometimes practice with the same team of the opposite sex, including
the boys and girls track and field teams. Most facilities are always available to the team, with the
exception of the boys and girls basketball teams, who share the Main Gym for practices and
competitive events during the winter. However, the availability of the facility used by girls
softball team at Bossen Park is limited by the field being used by the men’s beer league, limiting
their ability to complete competitive events. Moreover, the girls basketball team players said
they were occasionally displaced from the Main Gym, an issue that was not reported by the boys
basketball players.

Preparation

[Redacted content] told OCR that the girls softball team and their coach put up temporary
fencing at Pearl Park for practices and competitions because Pearl Park does not have fencing.
Page 24 of 35

Locker Rooms

Edison, Henry, South, and Washburn Locker Rooms

The boys and girls locker rooms used by the interscholastic athletes at Edison, Henry, South, and
Washburn are identical in terms of size, number of lockers, and general amenities, with the
exception of the Washburn boys PE locker room having a larger number of similarly sized
lockers than the girls PE locker room (320 vs. 280). Additionally, the Washburn Varsity locker
rooms do not have restroom or shower facilities, but athletes have access to these amenities in an
adjacent PE locker room. Although the lockers rooms have slightly different configurations for
their boys and girls shower and toilet areas, OCR found no meaningful differences between the
locker rooms at Edison, Henry, South and Washburn. The Washburn female interscholastic
athletes, however, reported that they do not always have access to their locker room and that
their locker room is locked throughout the day, while the boys locker room is open and the boys
have access to their locker room at all times.

North Locker Rooms

North’s boys and girls athletics participants use the locker rooms inside the Main Gym.
Additionally, there are two identical locker rooms, with typical locker room amenities, at North
Stadium that are designed to be used by home and away teams that are new and of high quality
but appear unused. [Redacted content] was not present during OCR’s onsite visit and the
[redacted content] was not familiar with the specific athletic program at North.

Girls Locker Room

The North girls locker room is a large space with 73 medium lockers, and 480 small half sized
lockers stacked one on top of another, and an additional 19 large lockers located in a separate
area. The locker room has individual stall restrooms, sinks, mirrors, permanent hair dryers
attached to the wall, and a separate area with individual stall showers (without curtains) and an
open shower area that included dividers without curtains. A long hallway area includes four full
length mirrors but appeared to be used as storage. The female athletes that participated in OCR’s
focus groups indicated that female athletes do not shower in the locker rooms because they have
a bad smell, there is not hot water, and they are dirty. OCR observed the locker room shower
area does not appear to be used, has an unpleasant odor, has build-up on the surface areas and
does not appear clean. The locker room floor was not clean and appeared to lack maintenance.

Boys Locker Room

The North boys locker room contains 102 large full-sized lockers and 416 small half-sized
lockers. The boys locker room also contains an equipment supply room for the football team, as
well as an area that has individual bathroom stalls, urinals, sinks, and a shower room with open
shower stalls. The boys locker room appeared to lack maintenance.

Roosevelt Locker Rooms

There are 3 locker rooms at Roosevelt located adjacent to the Main Gym.

Boys Varsity Locker Room
Page 25 of 35

The boys Varsity locker room is used exclusively by male interscholastic athletes. The locker
room has 216 large metal lockers, an area with a restroom stall, urinal, sink, mirror, soap
dispenser and paper towel dispenser, and an area with open showers. A training room is attached
to the boys Varsity PE locker room. The training room includes storage, an ice machine, a small
refrigerator, whiteboards, a paper towel dispenser, and a desk. A referee restroom is attached to
the training room, with a restroom stall, sink, mirror, soap dispenser and paper towel dispenser.
[Redacted content] stated this restroom is used by all referees, regardless of their sex.

Boys PE Locker Room

The boys PE locker room is not used by interscholastic athletes. It is a mirror image of the girls
PE locker room, has 614 smaller lockers stacked two tall, and has similar amenities.

Girls PE Locker Room

The girls PE locker room is used by all girl interscholastic athletes and all students who are
enrolled in PE. The locker room has 369 lockers total, including 152 large lockers and 227
smaller lockers stacked two tall. Thirty-five of the larger lockers are located in the “varsity area”
of the locker room, which is a small enclosure that only includes these 35 lockers on the outside
walls, with a small open space in the middle. The locker room has only two restroom stalls, two
sinks, two small mirrors and a long horizontal mirror, one soap dispenser, and one paper towel
dispenser. The girls PE locker room includes 7 individual/single stall showers and an open
shower area with metal dividers. OCR observed that the shower area lights flickered. The female
student athletes reported that they do not use the shower facilities because they lack hot water.

[Redacted content] and the female student athletes reported that there are not enough lockers for
each female student athlete to have their own locker during the fall season; however, all male
student athletes had access to a locker in one of the locker rooms. The female interscholastic
athletes also reported that they do not always have access to their locker room and that their
locker room is locked throughout the day. However, the boys locker rooms are open and the boys
have access to their locker room at all times.

Southwest Locker Rooms

There are 7 locker rooms at Southwest: boys and girls Varsity locker rooms, boys and girls PE
locker rooms, boys and girls pool locker rooms, and the boys stadium locker room. The Varsity
locker rooms are designated for and used exclusively by athletes. However, according to
[redacted content], not all teams use the locker rooms and the boys Varsity locker room is used
almost exclusively by the football team during the fall season. All students who are enrolled in
PE use the PE locker rooms, and interscholastic athletes also use the PE locker rooms. The boys
and girls pool locker rooms are used exclusively by the boys and girls Varsity and JV swimming
and diving athletes. [Redacted content] stated boys football players have exclusive use of the
stadium locker room, except when the boys soccer teams occasionally use the locker room
during practice and competitions.

Boys Varsity Locker Room and Girls Varsity Locker Room

The boys and girls Varsity locker rooms are located adjacent to the West gym. Although the
Varsity locker rooms are generally designated for Varsity athletes, they can be used by all
Page 26 of 35

athletes. The girls Varsity locker room has 124 large full-sized lockers and 20 medium sized
lockers, while the boys Varsity locker room has 192 full-sized lockers. The boys and girls
Varsity locker rooms include similar amenities in terms of restroom stalls, sinks, mirrors, soap
dispensers, a paper towel dispenser, except the girls Varsity locker room has individual/single
stall showers with shower curtain dividers, while the boys locker room has an open shower
room. The female interscholastic athletes reported that they do not always have access to the
girls Varsity locker room throughout the day because it is locked. However, the boys Varsity
locker rooms are open and the boys have access to their locker room at all times.

Boys PE Locker Room and Girls PE Locker Room

The boys and girls PE locker rooms are used by all athletes and all students who are enrolled in
PE. The PE locker rooms have a similar number and size of lockers, as well as similar
configuration for restrooms, sinks and showers. [Redacted content] stated that [redacted content]
assigns lockers to the students enrolled in PE for the semester. The remaining lockers are
unassigned and free for athletes to use.

Boys Pool Locker Room and Girls Pool Locker Room

The boys and girls pool locker rooms are located next to the pool and adjacent to the East Gym.
The pool locker rooms each have the same number and size of lockers, and a similar
configuration in terms of restroom and shower areas. The pool locker room lighting was very
dimmed, and the locker rooms appeared dark.

Boys Stadium Locker Room

The boys stadium locker room is located under the spectator bleachers in Southwest Stadium.
This locker room has 70 full-sized lockers, restroom stalls, a urinal, sinks, and mirrors. The boys
stadium locker room was observed by OCR to be dirty and at the time of the inspection,
appeared to be used as a storage facility, and is poorly ventilated.

Equipment and Supplies: Edison

The Complainant alleged that the Edison’s girls soccer team has lower quality uniforms and does
not have adequate supplies compared to the boys soccer team.

Funding for Equipment and Supplies

According to the District AD, the District does not provide funds for the purchase of equipment
and supplies. Equipment and supplies are purchased using discretionary athletics funds, referred
to as 5024 funds. 5024 funds are generally made up of student sport fees, team fundraising,
booster club money, and gate receipts from athletic events. The District does not provide
guidance to individual high schools as to how the school spends its 5024 funds. All
interscholastic athletics participants pay a student sport fee per season, which is retained by the
high school that provides the interscholastic athletics team and becomes part of the school’s 5024
fund. There are no policies in place regulating the use of student sport fees, and schools are not
required to use the fees generated by a specific athletics team to purchase equipment and
supplies for that team. For Co-op sports, the student sport fee is retained by either the host school
Page 27 of 35

or the District. During the 2021-2022 school year, Edison generated $28,383.00 for equipment
and supplies through student sport fees.

The District AD told OCR that the District provides a set amount of money to each District high
school annually to purchase uniforms for specific teams, with the goal of a six-year replacement
cycle. However, there are no specific requirements related to the use of the funds and the District
does not monitor or adjust the funding if a high school uses other funds to purchase uniforms or
does not use the allotted funds to purchase uniforms for the sport identified per the District’s
uniform replacement schedule. Individual high schools can also use booster club funds, as well
as discretionary athletic funds for uniforms. In 2022-2023, the District provided each school with
$14,000.00 to purchase uniforms.

Edison provides uniforms, equipment, and supplies for all interscholastic athletics teams offered
at the school. [Redacted content] requires the coaches for all interscholastic athletics teams to
maintain in good working condition the teams’ uniforms, equipment, and supplies. [Redacted
content] provides each team with storage space and access to the Edison washing facility.
[Redacted content] told OCR that each year, team coaches request equipment and supplies that
they need for their team, and [redacted content] divides the 5024 discretionary funds based on
each sport’s primary need, with each sport receiving some funding. The District did not identify
any specific District or school policies related to allocation of funding for athletics.

        Girls Badminton

For its 8-11 member badminton team, Edison provides a uniform top and shorts. Surveyed
athletes rated the quality and quantity of uniforms between “good” and “excellent.” The District
AD told OCR that the District will provide funding to purchase new badminton uniforms during
the 2023-2024 school year. Edison provides shuttlecocks for practice and competition. No
student athlete complained about the quality and quantity of shuttlecocks, and OCR verified that
Edison has sufficient quantity, quality, availability for practice and competition. Although
viewed as personal equipment, Edison allows student athletes who do not have badminton
racquets to use gym class racquets. Three athletes using them rated the Edison provided rackets
as “poor.” OCR’s on-site investigation confirmed the rackets are regulation, but well worn. One
athlete also stated that the nets are in poor condition. However, OCR observed sufficient newer
nets to hold practice and competition. OCR also observed the nets are regulation size and of
adequate quality.

        Boys Baseball

Edison provides uniforms to its 30-40 baseball athletes, consisting of 2 uniform tops (for home
and away), baseball pants, and a hat. Athletes interviewed by OCR stated that they are provided
additional items, like warm-ups, t-shirts, and sweatshirts through team fundraising. The District
AD told OCR that the District will provide funding to purchase new baseball uniforms during the
2024-2025 school year. Coaches surveyed by OCR rated the quality of the uniforms as “good.”
Most baseball athletes interviewed and surveyed by OCR similarly rated the quality of the
uniforms between “fair” and “good.” The players also informed OCR that they considered
helmets and bats as personal equipment, as some players have purchased better fitting and more
protective helmets and specifically sized and weighted bats. OCR, during its on-site inspection of
the school, also rated the quality of the baseball uniforms as good.
Page 28 of 35

According to [redacted content], Edison provides game and practice baseballs, helmets, bats,
catcher’s equipment and hitting equipment, including a pitching machine. The coaches surveyed
by OCR rated the equipment as “excellent.” The players rated their school provided equipment
as “fair” to “good.” The coaches and players interviewed and surveyed stated, and OCR verified
during its on-site inspection that the equipment is provided in sufficient quantity, is regulation
for practice and competition and is in good operating condition.

        Boys and Girls Basketball

For its 19-26 member girls basketball teams, and 27-37 member boys basketball teams, Edison
provides each team member with home and away jerseys and shorts, and a sweatsuit. According
to the District AD, all high schools received money in 2021 and Edison replaced its Varsity and
Junior Varsity boys and girls basketball uniforms that year. Lower-level teams (B-squad and or
freshman teams) wear past versions of uniforms for both girls and boys teams. The surveyed and
interviewed athletes of both sexes generally rated the quality of their uniforms as “good”. OCR’s
inspection verified the basketball uniforms for both boys and girls are regulation, well
maintained, and of sufficient number and quality. Players provide their own socks, compression
wear, and shoes. 5024 funds raised by the team are used to purchase team t-shirts, shorts, and
sweatshirts for practice and personal use.

In terms of equipment, the teams receive basketballs for practice and competitive events. Teams
use newer basketballs for competitions and older balls for practice. OCR verified that the
basketballs provided are regulation for both boys and girls teams. Although [redacted content]
told OCR that each sex has a rack of 15 basketballs (including both game and practice balls), the
surveyed boy basketball athletes complained about the number and wear on the available
basketballs. OCR noted the boys ball rack only had 8 basketballs in various stages of wear,
effecting the 27-37 boys. The girls ball rack, however, had 15 basketballs that appeared newer
and of higher quality.

        Boys Football

Edison provides uniforms to its 41-58 football athletes (including one girl), which consist of
home and away jerseys and pants, and provides practice jerseys and pants. The District allocated
money to Edison in 2021-2022 to replace football uniforms. Edison also provides helmets and
pads, tackling sleds, blocking pads, game balls, and practice balls from 5024 funds. Athletes
rated the uniforms, equipment, and supplies between “fair” and “good.” OCR’s on-site
inspection verified that the uniforms, equipment, and supplies are regulation, in good condition
for competition, and of sufficient quantity for practice and competition.

        Boys and Girls Golf

According to District information, only 3 girls and 9 boys participated in golf at Edison during
the 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 school years. Edison provides golf participants with a uniform
shirt and a golf bag for the season. The teams received donations of golf clubs (both new and
used) and golf balls that are available for the student athletes to use. The athletes provide their
Page 29 of 35

own shoes, gloves, tees, and additional balls. [Redacted content] rated the equipment and
supplies as regulation and “excellent.” No golf participants responded to OCR’s survey.

        Boys and Girls Soccer

Edison provides uniforms for its 50-51 member boys soccer team. Edison provides home and
away uniforms consisting of a short sleeve top and shorts. Edison also provides a separate long
sleeve goalie jersey of a contrasting color to each team. The District AD informed OCR that both
boys and girls soccer teams received money from the District to replace all soccer uniforms for
the 2023-2024 season. OCR notes that beginning in the 2021-2022 school year, Edison
participated in girls soccer as part of a Co-op sport hosted at another high school, and according
to the District AD the host school is responsible for providing the uniforms, equipment, and
supplies. However, OCR observed that Edison has two full sets of uniforms that are in new or
like-new condition for both boys and girls soccer teams. OCR observed that Edison has enough
uniforms for several levels of boys and girls teams. The soccer coaches surveyed by OCR rated
team uniforms as “good.” Surveyed athletes rated their uniforms as “fair” to “good” with one
boys soccer athlete rating the uniforms as “poor.” During the on-site visit, OCR found the quality
and quantity of uniforms for both the boys and girls teams to be of high quality. For equipment,
the District provides soccer balls for both practice and competition. During the onsite, OCR
observed the school to have a sufficient number of balls in good condition. OCR did not receive
any complaints related to the quality, quantity, and or availability of the soccer balls.

        Girls Softball

Edison provides uniforms to its 18-29 softball athletes, consisting of 2 uniform tops (for home
and away) and pants. Athletes interviewed by OCR stated that the coach provides each player
with a t-shirt and sweatshirt for practice. According to interviewed athletes the team received
visors and personal apparel (sliding pants, batting gloves, and socks) from the Minnesota Twins
Baseball Team. According to the District AD, Edison, like all other high schools, will receive
District funds in 2024-2025 to replace its current softball uniforms. Most surveyed softball
athletes rated the quality of the uniforms between “fair” and “good.” OCR, during its on-site
inspection of the school found the uniforms to be of good to excellent quality.

According to [redacted content], Edison provides softballs, helmets, bats, catcher’s equipment
and hitting equipment, including a pitching machine. Information obtained during interviews
indicated that the Minnesota Twins Baseball Team also provided the softball team bats, hitting
tees, and additional game balls. The players also informed OCR that they considered helmets and
bats as personal equipment, as some players have purchased better fitting and more protective
helmets and specifically sized and weighted bats. The players interviewed and surveyed stated,
and OCR verified during its on-site inspection, that the equipment provided is regulation for
practice and competition, is in good to excellent operating condition, and provided in an
adequate amount for the number of athletes.

        Boys and Girls Swimming

For its 1-2 member boys and girls swimming teams, Edison does not provide uniforms,
equipment, or supplies for either team. [Redacted content], confirmed this, and informed OCR
Page 30 of 35

that all athletes are required to provide their own swimsuits, warm-ups, caps, goggles,
kickboards, and fins. The swimming program is not on the District list for uniform funds.

        Boys and Girls Tennis

For its 13-14 member girls tennis athletes and 13-14 member boys tennis athletes, Edison
provides a uniform consisting of one shirt and one pair of shorts to each participant. The girls
and boys tennis coaches and athletes rated the uniforms as “poor” to “good.” One boys’ tennis
athlete told OCR that the uniforms are old, dated, and have not been replaced in many years.
OCR confirmed that both teams have adequate quantities of uniforms.

Edison provides the boys and girls tennis teams with tennis balls for practice and competition.
According to [redacted content], each season, each team receives a new 24 can case of tennis
balls to use for competitions. The teams use the balls for practice after using them for
competition. OCR observed the high quality of the tennis balls provided to the teams. The
District also provides secondhand rackets for athletes that do not have their own. Interviewed
and surveyed athletes and coaches rated the quality of the rackets provided by the school as
“poor.” OCR’s onsite inspection verified the condition of the rackets as “poor.” However,
according to the interviewed tennis athletes, many team members have their own personal
rackets for use.

        Boys and Girls Track and Field and Cross Country

For the 2022-2023 season, Edison used the District-provided funds to purchase new uniforms for
boys and girls track and field and cross country. The uniforms consist of a tank style top and
shorts. Edison’s 14-15 boy track athletes, 4 boy cross country athletes, 7 girl track athletes, and 4
girl cross country athletes received new uniforms. Surveyed coaches and athletes for both the
boys and girls teams rated the quality as “good” and the number sufficient, which OCR verified
during its on-site visit. Although personal items, Edison also provides shoes, donated from
outside parties, for the athletes (both boys and girls) to select from if an athlete needs shoes. The
track and cross country teams fundraise and receive booster support for t-shirts and sweatshirts
for personal and practice use. During athlete interviews, one track athlete stated that for female
athletes, Edison ordered several (3-4) compression type tops for the girls team, which are
prohibited by the MSHSL, making them non-regulation. As a result, some girls shared uniforms
during the 2022-2023 season, effecting 3 to 4 athletes. [Redacted content] informed OCR that he
corrected this error by ordering new tops for the girls team.

Edison also provides hurdles, starting blocks, jump pits, landing pads and high jump bars, which
the boys and girls track and field teams share. For throwing events, Edison provides separate
shot put and discus (based on size and weight) for the boys and girls teams. Although regulation
and rated “good” by interviewed and surveyed athletes, [redacted content] rated the equipment
related to shot put and discus as “poor.” During the on-site visit, OCR noted that Edison has 8
newer aluminum adjustable starting blocks, five larger discuses for boys and three smaller
discuses for girls. OCR noted the quality as adequate for practice and competition, with one
boy’s competition discus well worn. OCR also noted one practice/competition shotput for boys
and two practice shotputs (including one competition shotput) for girls. Again, although
regulation for practice and competition, they are all well-worn.
Page 31 of 35

        Girls Volleyball

Edison provides uniforms to its 31-35 volleyball athletes. The uniform consists of three jerseys
(two short sleeve and one long sleeve) and one pair of shorts. The team fundraises and purchases
t-shirts and sweatshirts for leisure and/or practice using 5024 funds. According to the District
AD, the uniforms were replaced for the 2022-2023 season. Interviewed and surveyed athletes
and coaches rated the uniform quality as “good” or “excellent” and of sufficient quantity. OCR’s
on-site inspection verified both the high quality and sufficient quantity of the uniforms. Athletes
also told OCR the players provide their own personal equipment/gear of shoes and knee pads. In
terms of equipment, Edison provides nets, standards, and volleyballs. Although generally rated
as “good” quality and to be regulation for the sport, [redacted content] indicated that the nets and
standards are old. In terms of volleyballs, surveyed and interviewed volleyball athletes rated the
volleyballs sufficient in number and of “fair” to “good” quality. During OCR’s on-site visit,
OCR found the volleyballs are regulation, of good quality and of sufficient quantity for a 31-35
member program to practice and compete. The nets, upon inspection during the on-site seemed
relatively new, of regulation size, and adequate for practice and or competition.

Wrestling

According to [redacted content], Edison has not provided any new uniforms, shoes, headgear, or
pads for the past five years. [Redacted content] informed OCR that for the last five seasons, the
14-18 wrestling athletes (including one girl) supplied their own uniforms and personal
equipment. According to the District AD, Edison will be receiving money to replace wrestling
uniforms in 2024-2025. Surveyed athletes confirmed [redacted content]’s survey response.

Analysis

Interests and Abilities

The information gathered in OCR’s investigation thus far reflects that the District does not
effectively accommodate the interests and abilities of girls as well as boys in its interscholastic
athletics programs. The District does not provide participation opportunities proportionate to
enrollment rates, the District cannot show a history of program expansion, and the District has
not yet demonstrated that the interests and abilities of the underrepresented sex are being fully
and effectively accommodated by the current athletics program.

        Part One: Participation in Proportion to Enrollment

OCR’s investigation thus far revealed that the overall District-wide female participation rates are
significantly lower than the District’s female enrollment rates in its high school interscholastic
athletics program, and the District provided 450 more participation opportunities for males than
females for the 2021-2022 school year and would need to provide 347 more participation
opportunities for females to achieve proportionality. Additionally, the data revealed that four
District high schools – Edison, Henry, North and South – did not provide interscholastic athletics
participation opportunities for male and female student athletes at their respective schools in
numbers substantially proportionate to their enrollment rates. While Title IX does not require
exact proportionality, the large differential of District-wide participation opportunities and the
variance at each of these four schools cannot be explained by natural fluctuations in enrollment
Page 32 of 35

and is sufficient to sustain several viable teams. Accordingly, that the information available to
date reflects that the District does not provide participation opportunities to females in numbers
substantially proportionate to their respective enrollments and as such, females are
underrepresented in the District’s high school athletics program, specifically at Edison, Henry,
North and South, as well as in the District overall. The evidence does not demonstrate that the
District has satisfied part one of the three-part test.

        Part Two: History of Program Expansion

OCR also noted that the District has not tracked and could not identify the teams that it has
added and eliminated since 1972. Accordingly, OCR determined that the District has not
demonstrated compliance with part two of the three-part test.

        Part Three: Interests and Abilities

Despite the disparity in enrollment and participation rates for females in the District, the District
has not completed a student athletic interest survey in the past ten years and has not maintained
copies of any past surveys or assessments conducted to gauge the students’ athletic interests and
abilities. Further, the District AD acknowledged that the District does not have written policies,
procedures, or criteria for determining how and whether sports and/or levels will be added to the
current interscholastic athletics programs, how an individual could request additional
interscholastic athletics opportunities, or how the District will assess or respond to such requests.
The District has not publicized a method by which students can request new sports or levels,
should a student be interested in participating in a sport or level of sport that is not offered at
their school. The school-level ADs did not identify any policies or procedures related to adding
or eliminating teams and levels, nor did they appear to have knowledge of their obligation to
assess whether they are providing opportunities to their male and female students that effectively
accommodate their interests and abilities.

Although the District offers essentially all MSHSL-sanctioned sports at at least one of its high
schools or through Co-op opportunities, the District is not providing transportation or taking
steps to make sure these are meaningful opportunities that are accessible to female students in
the District. Edison, Henry and North only offer nine of the twelve girls athletics teams offered at
Roosevelt, Southwest and Washburn, and the District does not offer clay target shooting and
synchronized swimming.

The Provision of Locker Rooms, Practice and Competitive Facilities

Additionally, OCR has identified disparities in several factors under the components of the
provision of locker rooms, practice and competitive facilities.

    1) Practice and Competitive Facilities

OCR observed the quality of the facilities used by the District’s interscholastic athletics teams to
be of average quality, with the exception of many of the fields that were observed to have patchy
or uneven grass.

The largest disparity found in OCR’s investigation relates to the practice and competitive
facilities for the girls softball teams District-wide, particularly when compared to the facilities
Page 33 of 35

provided to the boys baseball teams. The softball facilities used by the District’s softball teams
include Bossen Park, Creekview Park, Jackson Square Park, Pearl Park, and Pershing Park – of
which Bossen Park, Jackson Square Park, Pearl Park, Pershing Park are not regulation for fast
pitch softball. Although Bossen Park is a newer facility with overall higher quality fields with
lighting, the field lacks scoreboards or a PA system. Jackson Park, Pearl Park and Pershing Park
are lower quality fields, with weeds and patchy grass, no dugouts, and they lack adequate
fencing. Although the Creekview Park softball field appears to be regulation for fast pitched
softball, the facility is of poor quality and maintenance and lacks lights for evening practice or
competition.

Furthermore, with respect to availability of the facilities used by the District’s interscholastic
athletics teams, OCR’s investigation found that the girls softball teams are regularly displaced
from competitive events because their facility was not available to them after 6pm due to a
recreational adult men’s softball league using the facility at – and often before – that time, which
prevented teams from completing their competitions. Additionally, during the 2022-2023 school
year, the Henry-hosted girls softball team had to compete and practice in a parking lot due to the
Creekview facility not being available to them for usage.

Overall, the District boys baseball teams practice and compete at higher quality baseball fields.
The Bossen Park baseball field is of lower quality and has few to no amenities, and Cassidy
Field, Northeast Athletic Field and Van Cleve Field lack lighting, which negatively impact the
boys baseball players; however, the other fields used by the District baseball teams are of high
quality with better amenities. Although the baseball field at North Commons Park lacks lights for
evening play, it is otherwise a high-quality field. Parade Stadium, Neiman Sports Complex, and
Pearl Park, in particular, appeared to be fields of high quality that are regulation for competition,
and some baseball players are provided the opportunity to play at a major league baseball
facility, with no similar opportunity provided to female athletes.

In terms of maintenance and preparation of the practice and competitive facilities, the District
generally reported that the school-level ADs and other building level staff prepare school
facilities for practice and competitions, that Park Board staff prepare respective Park District
facilities, and that the other outside facilities are prepared and maintained by the facility.
However, several girls volleyball teams are responsible for setting up their nets for practices,
competitions, or both, and several girls badminton teams reported responsibility for setting up
their nets for practices and competitions, as well as seating for their events. Additionally, the
girls softball teams at two schools have to set up outfield fencing because their facility lacks
fencing. One school reported that the wrestling team is responsible for setting up mats for
competitive events; however, all schools had a separate room used for wrestling practices that
does not require set up. The disparity in preparation and maintenance appears to negatively affect
a higher proportion of female athletes.

    2) Locker Rooms

The male and female athletes at Edison, Henry and South had locker rooms that are of similar or
identical size and quality. OCR’s investigation raised concerns regarding the quality of locker
rooms for the female student athletes at North, as the female athletes reported their locker rooms
lacked hot water and OCR observed the locker rooms were not clean and seemed and poorly
maintained. At Roosevelt, the male athletes have an additional separate locker room for
Page 34 of 35

exclusive use by the athletic participants, whereas all the female Roosevelt athletes share a
locker room with the students who participate in PE. The female athletes at Roosevelt also
reported that their locker room lacked hot water. At Southwest, the male and female athletes had
3 sets of similar locker rooms for each sex, but also had an additional locker room at the stadium
for the exclusive use of the boys football team, with occasional use by the boys soccer team.
Although OCR noted this facility to be poorly cleaned and ventilated, this additional locker room
is an overall benefit to the football and soccer players who use the facility. Finally, as to
availability, the female athletes at several schools reported that their locker rooms are locked
during the day, whereas the boys locker rooms are open and available to them.

The Provision of Equipment and Supplies (Edison only)

OCR has determined that there is insufficient evidence to establish that Edison fails to provide
equal athletic opportunity in the provision of equipment and supplies. Although the complaint
alleged that the Edison’s girls soccer team has lower quality uniforms and does not have
adequate supplies compared to the boys soccer team, OCR found Edison had sufficient and
equivalent quality and quantity of soccer supplies for both a boys and girls team. OCR found that
Edison provided the least amount of overall support in uniforms, equipment and supplies to its
wrestling team (18 males) and boys and girls swim team (2 male and 1 female). OCR also noted
the girls softball team (18 females) received more personal equipment than boys baseball (37
males), and the girls’ basketball team (19 females) received more supplies (basketballs) than the
boys basketball team (35 males). However, this benefit to female students was offset by an error
in uniform ordering for female track and field athletes (9 females), and the girls’ volleyball team
(31 females) and badminton team using worn nets (9 athletes). Based on the foregoing, the
evidence is insufficient to show that Edison fails to provide equal athletic opportunities for its
female athletes in the provision of uniforms, equipment, and supplies.

Additional concerns regarding Booster Clubs

OCR’s investigation also raised additional concerns that the booster club funds and other funds
raised by the District as part of 5024 funds are not being monitored, which may be causing
inequities. Student athletes at some District schools reported booster funds have been used to
purchase multiple uniforms and warm-up sets for some teams and used to purchase coach buses
as transportation to competitive events for only some sports.

Conclusion and Resolution Agreement

In accordance with Section 302 of OCR’s CPM, a complaint may be resolved at any time when,
before the conclusion of the investigation, the recipient expresses an interest in resolving the
complaint. OCR determined that it is appropriate to resolve the complaint allegations because the
District expressed interest in resolving the compliant through a 302 resolution agreement and
OCR has identified concerns that can be addressed through a resolution agreement.

Prior to the conclusion of OCR’s investigation, the District signed the enclosed Agreement,
which is fully aligned with the complaint allegations, the evidence obtained to date, and OCR’s
compliance concerns. The Agreement requires the District to equally and effectively
accommodate the athletics interests and abilities of both girls and boys and to provide equal
opportunities in the provision of locker rooms, practice and competitive facilities. The
Page 35 of 35

Agreement requires the District to create District-wide policies for the interscholastic athletics
program; to establish a Stakeholder Committee to provide input and recommendations to the
District as it creates its District-wide policies and procedures; to conduct a full assessment of
how the District can equally and effectively accommodate the athletic interest and abilities to the
extent necessary to provide equal opportunities for female students in its high school
interscholastic athletics program; develop a plan, with timeframes, to increase participation
opportunities for female students as necessary to demonstrate compliance with Title IX; to
similarly assess and develop a plan with respect to the provision of practice and competitive
facilities and locker rooms at each School in the District; and to provide training to its Title IX
Coordinators, ADs, principals and coaches on their responsibilities under Title IX and its
application to athletics, including how funding sources can affect the balance of equivalent
benefits for male and female athletes.

This concludes OCR’s investigation of the complaint and should not be interpreted to address the
District’s compliance with any other regulatory provision or to address any issues other than
those addressed in this letter. This letter sets forth OCR’s determination in one OCR case. This
letter is not a formal statement of OCR policy and should not be relied on, cited, or construed as
such. OCR’s formal policy statements are approved by a duly authorized OCR official and made
available to the public.

Please be advised that the District may not harass, coerce, intimidate, discriminate or otherwise
retaliate against any individual because he or she has filed a complaint or participated in the
complaint resolution process. If this happens, the individual may file a complaint with OCR
alleging such treatment.

The complainant may have a right to file a lawsuit in federal court whether or not OCR finds a
violation.

Under the Freedom of Information Act, it may be necessary to release this document and related
correspondence and records upon request. In the event that OCR receives such a request, we will
seek to protect, to the extent provided by law, personally identifiable information, which, if
released, could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy.

OCR looks forward to working with the District during the monitoring of the Agreement. If you
have any questions about this letter, please contact Mr. Miguel Figueras at (202) 987-1346 or
miguel.figueras@ed.gov.

                                             Sincerely,




                                             Melissa Katt
                                             Supervisory Attorney

Enclosure
cc:    Margaret A. Skelton, via email only to mas@ratwiklaw.com
